Spelling
========

#. All religious, civil, and military titles of honor and respect, and forms of address, preceding the name, except Mr., Messrs., Mrs. (French: M., MM., Mme, Mile), Dr., Rev., Hon., St. (do not, except in quotations and in correspondence, set the Rev., the Hon.); Esq., following the name, should like- wise always be abbreviated.

#. Christian names, as George, Charles, John (not: Geo., Chas., Jno.), except where the abbreviated form is used in quoted matter or in original signa- tures; and "von" as part of a person's name (see 240) ; references in text (not parenthetical or foot- note citations) to chapters, pages, lines, figures, etc. (See 69.)

#. Subject to the exceptions named at the end of this section, in ordinary reading-matter, all numbers of less than three digits, unless of a statistical or technical character, or unless occurring in groups of six or more following each other in close succes- sion. (See 2736.)

    "There are thirty -eight cities in the United States with a population of 100,000 or over"; "a fifty-yard dash"; "two pounds of sugar"; "Four horses, sixteen cows, seventy-six sheep, and a billy goat constituted the live stock of the farm"; "He spent a total of two years, three months, and seventeen

    days in jail." But: "He spent 128 days in the hospital"; "a board 20 feet 2 inches long by i$ feet wide and ij inches thick"; "the ratio of 16 to i"; "In some quarters of Paris, inhabited by wealthy families, the death-rate is i to every 65 persons; in others, inhabited by the poor, it is i to 15"; "His purchase consisted of 2 pounds of sugar, 20 pounds of flour, i pound of coffee, \ pound of tea, 3 pounds of meat, and ij pounds of fish, besides 2 pecks of potatoes and a pint of vinegar."

    Treat all numbers in connected groups alike, as far as possible; do not use figures for some and spell out others; if the largest contains three or more digits, use figures for all (see 96) :

    "The force employed during the three months was 87, 93, and 106, respectively."

    As a general rule, however, decimals, degrees, dimensions, distances, enumerations, money, per- centage, weights, and like matter should be expressed in figures:

    10, 45 miles, 3 cubic feet, 24 pages, 100 bushels, 9 per cent (see 123), 45 pounds, $1,000, etc.

#. Round numbers (i.e., approximate figures in even units, the unit being 100 in numbers of less than 1,000, and 1,000 in numbers of more) :

    "The attendance was estimated at five hundred" (but: "at 550"); "a thesis of about three thousand words" (but: "of about 2,700"); "The population of Chicago is approximately three millions" (but: "2,900,000"). Cases like 1,500, if for some special reason spelled out, should be written "fifteen hundred," not "one thousand five hundred."

#. All numbers, no matter how high, and all terms of measurement or number otherwise abbreviated, commencing a sentence in ordinary reading-matter: "Five hundred and ninety-three men, 417 women, and 126 children under eighteen, besides 63 of the crew, went down with the ship"; "Figure 3 shows the comparative difference in prices."

    When this is impracticable, or for any reason unde- sirable, reconstruct the sentence; e.g.: "The total number of those who went down with the ship was 593 men," etc.

#. Sums of money, when occurring in isolated cases in ordinary reading-matter :

    "The admission was two dollars."  When several such numbers occur close together, and in all matter of a statistical character, use figures: "Admission: men, $2; women, $i; children, 25 cents."

#. Time of day, in ordinary reading-matter:

    at four; at half-past two in the afternoon; at seven o'clock.  Statistically, in enumerations, and always in connec- tion with A.M. and P.M., use figures: at 4: 15 P.M. (omit "o'clock" in such connections).

#. Ages:

    eighty years and four months old; children between six and fourteen.

#. Numbers of centuries, of Egyptian dynasties, of sessions of Congress, of military bodies, of political divisions, of thoroughfares, and in all similar cases, unless brevity is an important consideration (see 7, 8, and 13) :

nineteenth century; Fifth Dynasty; Fifty-fourth Congress, second session; Fifteenth Infantry I.N.G.; Sixth Con- gressional District, Second Ward; Fifth Avenue.

#. References to particular decades: in the nineties (see 165).

#. Names of months, except in statistical matter or in long enumerations:

     from January i to April 15 (omit, after dates, st, d, and th).

#. In most cases, all names of publications. This rule, like many another, is open to modification in particu- lar instances, for expediency, nature of context, authoritative usage, and author's preference. Gen- erally, if in doubt, spell out; good taste will condone offenses in this direction more readily than in the opposite.

#. Form the possessive of proper names ending in s or another sibilant, if monosyllabic, by adding an apostrophe and s; if of more than one syllable, by adding an apostrophe only, except names ending in -ce (see 165) :

     King James's Version, Burns's poems, Marx's theories; Moses' law, Jesus' birth, Demosthenes' orations, Berlioz' compositions; Horace's odes.

     But in the case of proper names ending in a silent sibilant the possessive is formed by the addition

     of the apostrophe and s, whether the word is

     monosyllabic or not:

     Charlevoix's discoveries, Des Moines's population.

#. Differentiate "farther" and "further" by using the former in the sense of "more remote," "at a greater distance" (with verbs of action); the latter in the sense of "moreover," "in addition":

     the farther end; he went still farther; further, he suggested; a further reason.
