
CAPITALIZE 

#. Proper nouns and adjectives: 

George, America, North America, Englishman; Elizabethan, 
French. (See 53.) 

Do not capitalize verbs derived from proper names 
and having a specialized meaning: 

to boycott, to fletcherize, to pasteurize; 

nor such words as the following, when used in 

their special scientific or trade significance: 

volt, ampere, angstrom, farad, watt, henry, ohm, coulomb. 

#. Epithets used as substitutes for proper names, or 
affixed to a name: 

the Pretender, Bloody Mary, Richard the Lion-hearted, 
Alexander the Great. 

#. The particles in French names, a: "le," "la," "de," 
"du," when they are not preceded by a Christian 
name or title; but do not capitalize them when 
they are preceded by such name or title: 

Le Bossu, La Torre, La Rochelle, De Coligny, D'Aubigne*, 
Du Maurier (but: Rene le Bossu, Miguel de la Torre, 
Gaspard de Coligny, Thomas d'Aubigne, George du 
Maurier). 

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Capitalize "Van" in Dutch names; do not capi- 
talize "von" in German names unless it begins a 
sentence: 

Stephen Van Rensselaer; Hugo von Martius, von Dobschiitz. 

NOTE. Personal preference is responsible for the following ex- 
ceptions: Henry van Dyke, J. H. van't Hoff, A. van Maanen. 

4. Generic terms forming a part of geographical names: 

Atlantic Ocean, Dead Sea, Baffin's Bay, Gulf of Mexico, 
Straits of Gibraltar, Straits Settlements, Mississippi River, 
Three Rivers, Laughing Brook, Rocky Mountains, Blue 
Hills, Pike's Peak, Mount of Olives, Great Desert, Death 
Valley, Prince Edward Island, Sea (Lake) of Galilee. 

But do not capitalize words of this class when simply 
added by way of description to the specific name, 
without forming an organic part of such name: 

the river Elbe, the desert of Sahara, the island of Madagascar. 

Subject to the rule above, the following lists will be 
found useful (see 104) : 

CAPITALIZE, IN SINGULAR FORM ONLY, WHEN IMMEDIATELY 
FOLLOWING NAME 



Archipelago 
Borough 
Branch (stream) 
Butte 


Fork 
Gap 
Glacier 
Gulch 


Park 
Plateau 
Range 
Reservation 


Canyon 
County 
Crater 


Harbor 
Head 
Hollow 


Ridge 
River 
Run 


Creek 
Delta 


Mesa 
Ocean 


Valley 


Forest 


Parish (La.) 





MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 



CAPITALIZE, IN SINGULAR OR PLURAL FORM, WHEN IMME- 
DIATELY FOLLOWING THE NAME 

Hill Mountain Spring 

Island Narrows 



CAPITALIZE, IN SINGULAR FORM, EITHER BEFORE OR AFTER 
THE NAME; AND IN PLURAL FORM BEFORE THE NAME 

Bay Fort Peak 

Bayou Isle Point 

Camp (military) Lake Port 

Cape Mount Sea 

Dalles Oasis Strait 

Desert Pass Volcano 
Falls 

5. Adjectives and nouns used singly or in conjunction, 
to distinguish definite regions, and when used in 
connection with a recognized geographical term; 
and also terms applied to groups of states: 

Old World, Western Hemisphere, Continental Europe, the 
Continent (to distinguish it from the British Isles), North 
Pole, Equator, the North ( = Scandinavia), the East (the 
Orient), the Far East, the Levant; the North, South, East, 
West, Middle West (United States) ; Northern Europe (but : 
southern California); North Atlantic states, Gulf states, 
Pacific Coast states. 

But do not, as a rule, capitalize adjectives derived 
from such names or nouns simply designating 
direction or point of compass: 

oriental customs, the southern states, the middle western 
states, a southerner (but: Northman = Scandinavian) ; an 
invasion of barbarians from the north, extending through 
the south of Europe. 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

In order that a distinction may be made between 
a local and a world-wide application, the latter 
should be capitalized: 

Eastern peoples (i.e., peoples of the Orient); Western 
nations. 

6. Generic terms for political divisions: 

(1) when the term is an organic part of the name, 
following the proper name directly : 

Holy Roman Empire, German Empire (=Deutsches Reich), 
French Republic (=Republique franfaise), United Kingdom, 
Northwest Territory, Cook County, Evanston Township, 
Kansas City (New York City exception). 

(2) when, with the preposition "of," it is used as 
an integral part of the name to indicate certain 
minor administrative subdivisions in the United 
States: 

Department of the Lakes, Town of Lake, Borough of Man- 
hattan. 

(3) when used singly as the accepted designation 
for a specific division: 

the Union, the States, the Republic (= United States), [the 
Confederacy], the Dominion (= Canada), the West Side. 

(4) when it is part of a fanciful or popular appel- 
lation used as if a real geographical name : 

Celestial Empire, Holy (Promised) Land, Badger State, 
Eternal City, Garden City. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 7 

But do not (with the exceptions noted) capitalize such 
terms when standing alone, or when, with "of," 
preceding the specific name: 

the empire, the state; empire of Russia, kingdom of Servia, 
duchy of Anhalt, state of Illinois, county of Cook, city of 
Chicago; but: the Empire (meaning the Roman Empire). 

7. Numbered political divisions (see 100) : 

Eleventh Congressional District, First Ward, Second Precinct. 

8. The names of thoroughfares, parks, squares, blocks, 
buildings, etc. (see 100) : 

Drexel Avenue, Rings trasse, Via Appia, Chicago Drainage 
Canal; Lincoln Park; Trafalgar Square; Monadnock 
Block; Lakeside Building, Capitol, White House, County 
Hospital, Theatre Francais, Lexington Hotel, Masonic 
Temple [Solomon's temple, but, when standing alone: the 
Temple]. 

But do not capitalize such general designations of 
buildings as "courthouse," "post-office," "library," 
etc., except in connection with the name of the place 
in which they are located, when they thus form a 
proper name. 

9. The names of political parties, religious denomina- 
tions or sects, and philosophical, literary, and artistic 
schools, and their adherents: 

Republican, Conservative, National Liberal, Social Democ- 
racy (where, as in Continental Europe, it is organized as 
a distinct parliamentary faction); Christian, Protestantism 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Evangelical Lutheran, Catholic, Reformed, Greek Orthodox, 
Anabaptist, Seventh-Day Adventists, the Establishment, 
High Church, High Churchman, Separatist, Nonconform- 
ist, Dissenter, Papist, Ultramontane, Theosophist, Jew, 
Gentile as a noun, Pharisee (but: scribe) (adjective: 
Pharisaic, but : pharisaic, when used of characteristics, and 
not of the sect itself); Epicurean, Stoic, Gnosticism (but: 
neo-Platonism, pseudo-Christianity, un-Christian see 203, 
208), Literalist; the Romantic movement, the Symbolic 
school of painters. 

But do not capitalize any of the foregoing or similar 
words, or their derivatives, when used in their origi- 
nal or acquired general sense of pervading spirit, 
point of view, trend of thought, attitude of mind, or 
mode of action: 

republican form of government, a true democrat and a con- 
servative statesman, socialism as an economic panacea, the 
communistic theory, single-taxer, anarchism; catholicity of 
mind, puritanical ideas, evangelical spirit, pharisaic super- 
ciliousness; deist, pantheism, rationalist; epicurean tastes, 
stoic endurance, dualism and monism in present-day philoso- 
phy, an altruistic world-view; the classics, a nemesis. 

10. The names of monastic orders and their members: 
Black Friars, Dominican, Jesuit. 

11. The proper (official) titles of social, religious, educa- 
tional, political, commercial, and industrial organiza- 
tions and institutions: 

Union League Club, Knights Templar; Young People's 
Society of Christian Endeavor, Associated Charities; Smith- 
sonian Institution, State University of Iowa, Hyde Park High 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 9 

School; the Commercial Academy (Handelsakademie) of 
Leipzig, the Paris Lyceum (Lycee de Paris); the Forty 
[Immortals]; Cook County Democracy, Tammany Hall; 
Associated Press, Typographical Union No. 16; Chicago, 
Milwaukee & St. Paul Railroad, The Macmillan Company. 

But do not capitalize such generic terms when used 
to designate a class; nor when standing alone, even 
if applied to a specific institution, except to avoid 
ambiguity or, rarely, where the word is consistently 
and clearly used in place of the true name : 

young people's societies, the high school at Lemont, local 
typographical unions; the club, the association, the company; 
but: "He joined the Hall [Tammany]," "a member of the 
[French] Academy." (See 49.) 

12. The names of legislative, judiciary, and administra- 
tive bodies and governmental departments, and their 
branches, when specifically applied: 

Congress (Senate, House of Representatives [the House], 
Committee of Ways and Means), Parliament (House of 
Lords, House of Commons), Reichstag, Chamber of Deputies 
(the Chamber), General Assembly of Illinois, Chicago City 
Council, South Park Commissioners; Supreme Court of the 
United States, Circuit Court of Cook County, [Sanhedrin]; 
Department of the Interior, Census Office, Springfield Board 
of Education, Department of Public Works, the United 
States Army (but : he has served in the army; an army man). 

But do not capitalize such general, paraphrastic, or 
incomplete designations as 

the national assembly, the legislature of the state, the upper 
house of Congress, the Dutch diet; the council, the depart- 
ment, the board. 



10 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

13. Ordinals used to designate Egyptian dynasties, 
sessions of Congress, names of regiments, and in 
similar connections (see 100) : 

the Eighteenth Dynasty (but: the Ming dynasty), the 
Fifty-third Congress, the Second Illinois Regiment Band. 

14. Commonly accepted appellations for historical 
epochs, periods in the history of a language or 
literature, and geological ages and strata, the word 
"age" itself being capitalized only where a failure 
to do so would result in ambiguous meaning: 

Neolithic age (but: Stone Age, Middle Ages), Crusades, 
Renaissance, Reformation, Inquisition, Commonwealth 
(Cromwell's), Commune (Paris); Old English (OE see 
123), Middle High German (MHG), the Age of Elizabeth; 
Pleistocene, Silurian, Lower Carboniferous, Christian Era. 

But do not capitalize informal adjectives in such 
phrases as 

early Algonkian, late Permian. 

15. Names of important events: 

Thirty Years' War, Peasants' War (German), Revolution 
(French), Revolutionary War or War of Independence 
(American), Whiskey Insurrection (American), Civil War 
(American), War of 1812, Franco-Prussian War, Battle of 
Gettysburg; Peace of Utrecht, Louisiana Purchase. 

16. Political alliances, and such terms from secular or 
ecclesiastical history as have, through their associa- 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION II 

tions, acquired special significance as designations 
for parties, classes, movements, etc. (see 9) : 

Protestant League, Holy Alliance, Dreibund; the Roses, the 
Roundheads, Independents, Independency (English history), 
Nonconformist, Dissenter, Separatist. 

17. Conventions, congresses, expositions,etc. : 

Council of Nicaea, Parliament of Religions, Fifteenth Inter- 
national Congress of Criminology, Westminster Assembly, 
Chicago World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition. 

18. Titles of specific treaties, acts, laws (juridical), 
bills, etc.: 

Treaty of Verdun, Art. V of the Peace of Prague, Edict of 
Nantes, Concordat, the Constitution (of the United States, 
when standing alone, or when referred to as a literary docu- 
ment; but not usually that of any other state or country, e.g., 
the constitution of Illinois), Declaration of Independence, 
Act of Emancipation, Magna C(h)arta, Corn Laws, Reform 
Bill (English), Fourteenth Amendment, Sherman Anti- 
trust Law (but not such bills as have not yet become laws 
nor such treaties or laws when cited otherwise than under 
their formal titles: treaty at Versailles, Food bill). 

19. Creeds and confessions of faith: 

Apostles' Creed, Nicene Creed (but: ante-Nicene see 203, 
208), Augsburg Confession, Thirty-nine Articles. 

20. Civic holidays and ecclesiastical fast and feast days : 
Fourth of July (the Fourth), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day; 
Easter, Passover, Feast of Tabernacles, New Year's Day. 

21. Titles of honor and respect, whether religious, 
civil, or military, preceding the name, and academic 



12 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

degrees following the name; all titles of honor or 
of nobility, when referring to specific persons, 
either preceding the name or used in place of the 
proper name; familiar names applied to particular 
persons; orders (decorations) and the titles accom- 
panying them; titles, without the name, used in 
direct address; titles without the name when used 
of existing incumbents of office; and such words 
as "President," "King," "Sultan," and "Pope," 
standing alone, when referring to a specific ruler 
or incumbent: 

Queen Victoria, ex-President Cleveland, Rear-Admiral 
Dewey, Brigadier General Brown, Lieutenant Commander 
Smith; United States Commissioner of Education Harris, 
Dr. Davis; Father Boniface, Deacon Smith; Timothy 
Dwight, D.D., LL.D. ; James Brown, Doctor of Philosophy; 
Thomas Graham, Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society; 
the Prince of Wales, the Marquis of Lome, His Majesty, 
His Grace; the Apostle to the Gentiles, "the Father of his 
Country"; Order of the Red Eagle, Knight Commander 
of the Bath; "Allow me to suggest, Judge . . . ."; the 
Bishop of London; the Senator; "The President [of the 
United States] was chosen arbitrator," "the Pope's policy." 

But do not capitalize the official title of a person 
when the title follows the name (see 49); when 
standing alone, without the name (with the excep- 
tions noted above, and see 49) ; or when, followed 
by the name, it is preceded by the article "the": 

Woodrow Wilson, president of the United States; B. L. 
Gildersleeve, professor of Greek (see 49); Ferdinand W. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 13 

Peck, commissioner-general to the Paris Exposition; the 
archbishop (meaning other than the existing incumbent), 
the senator (when not speaking of the existing member), 
the archduke Francis Ferdinand, the apostle Paul. 

22. Abbreviations like Ph.D., M.P., and F.R.G.S., and 

designations of celestial objects (see 48) (such 
titles to be set without space between the letters) 
(see 52, 103, 106). 

23. Abbreviations consisting of one letter, except in 
case of units of measurement and minor literary 
subdivisions (see 54, 55, no, in): 

R.V. (Revised Version), F. (Fahrenheit), C. (centigrade), 
A (angstrom units) (but: p., 1., n., etc.). 

24. Nouns and adjectives used to designate the Supreme 
Being or Power, or any member of the Christian 
Trinity; and all pronouns referring to the same, 
when not closely preceded or followed by a dis- 
tinctive name, or unless such reference is otherwise 
perfectly clear: 

the Almighty, Ruler of the universe, the First Cause, the 
Absolute, Providence (personified), Father, Son, Holy Ghost, 
the Spirit, Savior, Messiah, Son of Man, the Logos, [and 
the Virgin Mary]; "Trust Him who rules all things" (but: 
"When God had worked six days, he rested on the seventh"). 

But do not capitalize such expressions and deriva- 
tives as 

(God's) fatherhood, (Jesus') sonship, messiahship, messianic 
hope, christological (but: Christology). 



14 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

25. Words which have an acquired, limited, or special 
meaning: 

the Doctor's degree; a report of the Master (in chancery); 
a Bachelor's hood; a Freshman. 

But do not capitalize such expressions as 
the doctorate, a master in chancery (the last two words being 
explanatory, the capitalization of "master" is here no longer 
necessary to indicate a special meaning). 

26. "Nature" and similar terms, and abstract ideas, 
when personified: 

"Nature wields her scepter mercilessly"; "Vice in the old 
English morality plays." 

27. "Father" used for church father, and "reformers" 
used of Reformation leaders, whenever the meaning 
otherwise would be ambiguous: 

the Fathers, the early Fathers, the Greek Fathers, [Pilgrim 
Fathers], the Reformers (but: the church reformers of the 
fifteenth century). 

28. The word "church" in properly cited titles of 
nationally organized bodies of believers in which, 
through historical associations, it has become insepa- 
rably linked with the name of a specific locality; or 
when forming part of the name of a particular 
edifice: 

Church of Rome, Church of England, High Church; Church 
of the Holy Sepulcher, Fifth Avenue Baptist Church, First 
Methodist Church. 

But do not capitalize, except as noted above, when 
standing alone, in any sense universal, national, 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 15 

local or when the name is not correctly or fully 
quoted : 

the church (= organized Christianity), the Eastern (Greek 
Orthodox) church, the Roman Catholic church, the estab- 
lished church (but: the Establishment), the state church; the 
Baptist church in Englewood. 

NOTE. In exceptional cases, where the opposition of Church 
and State constitutes a fundamental part of the argument, and 
it is desired to lend force to this antithesis, emphasis may be added 
by capitalizing the two words. 

29. Names for the Bible and other sacred books: 

(Holy, Sacred) Scriptures, Holy Writ, Word of God, Book of 
Books; Koran, Vedas, Mishna, the Upanishads; Apocrypha. 

But do not capitalize adjectives derived from such 

nouns : 

biblical, scriptural, koranic, vedic, talmudic, apocryphal. 

30. Versions and editions of the Bible: 

King James's Version, Authorized Version (A.V.), Revised 
Version (R.V.), Polychrome Bible, Septuagint (LXX), 
Peshitto. 

31. Books and divisions of the Bible and of other sacred 
books (Christian or otherwise) (see 60) : 

Old Testament, Pentateuch, Exodus, II (Second) Kings, 
Book of Job, Psalms (Psalter), the [Mosaic] Law and the 
[writings of the] Prophets, Minor Prophets, Wisdom Literature, 
Gospel of Luke, Synoptic Gospels, Fourth Gospel, Acts of 
the Apostles (the Acts), Epistle to the Romans, Pastoral 
Epistles, Apocalypse (Revelation), Sermon on the Mount, 
Beatitudes, Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments (Decalogue), 
Judith, Bel and the Dragon, the Koran, the Vedas. 



1 6 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

But do not capitalize words like "book," "gospel," 
"epistle," "psalm" in such connections as 

the five books of Moses, the first forty psalms, the gospels 
and epistles of the New Testament, [the synoptic problem, 
the synoptists], the biblical apocalypses. 

32. Biblical parables: 

the parable of the Prodigal Son. 

33. Such miscellaneous terms as 

Last Supper, Eucharist, the Passion, the Twelve (apostles), 
the Seventy (disciples), the Servant, the Day of Yahweh, the 
Chronicler, the Psalmist, the Golden Rule, the Kingdom of 
God, or of Heaven. 

34. The first word of a sentence, and in poetry the first 
word of each line: 

In summer, on the headlands, 

The Baltic Sea along, 
Sit Neckan, with his harp of gold, 

And sings his plaintive song. 

But in Greek and Latin poetry capitalize only the 
first word of a paragraph, not of each verse (line) : 

Town 8' dotSos aeiSe irepixAvTos, ot Sc cruairrj 
eurr' axouovTCs' 6 8' 'A^atwv voarov aeiSev, 
Avypdv, ov fK TpoirjS eTreretXaro IlaAAas 'Adrivrj. 

TOV 8' VTTp(l)l6$V <f>p<TL (TVvOeTO QicrinV (ZOtS^V 

Kovprj 'iKoptoio, Trcpu^pwv II^veXoTreta' 

Talia praefantes quondam felicia Pelei 
carmina diuino cecinerunt pectore Parcae 
praesentes: namque ante domos inuisere castas 
heroum et sese mortali ostendere coetu 
caelicolae nondum spreta pietate solebant 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 17 

35. The first word after a colon only when introducing 
a complete passage, or sentence which would have 
independent meaning, as in summarizations and 
quotations not closely connected with what precedes; 
or where the colon has the weight of such expres- 
sion as "as follows," "namely," "for instance," or 
a similar phrase, and is followed by a logically com- 
plete sentence: 

"In conclusion I wish to say: It will be seen from the above 
that ...."; "As the old proverb has it: 'Haste makes 
waste'"; "My theory is: The moment the hot current strikes 
the surface . . . ." 

But do not capitalize the first word of a quotation if 
immediately connected with what precedes (unless, 
as the first word of a sentence, beginning a paragraph 
in reduced type) ; or the first word after a colon, if 
an implied "namely," or a similar term, is followed 
by a brief explanatory phrase, logically dependent 
upon the preceding clause: 

"The old adage is true that 'haste makes waste'"; "Two 
explanations present themselves: either he came too late for 
the train, or he was detained at the station." 

36. As a rule, the first word in sections of an enumera- 
tion, if any one link contains two or more distinct 
clauses, separated by a semicolon, colon, or period, 
unless all are dependent upon the same term pre- 
ceding and leading up to them (see 138) : 

His reasons for refusal were three: (i) He did not have the 
time. (2) He did not have the means; or, at any rate, had no 



l8 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

funds available at the moment. (3) He doubted the feasi- 
bility of the plan. But: He objected that (i) he did not 
have the time; (2) he did not have the means; or, at any 
rate, had no funds available; (3) he doubted the feasibility 
of the plan. 

37. As a rule, nouns followed by a numeral particu- 
larly a capitalized Roman numeral indicating 
their order in a sequence; also sums of money in 
German and French: 

Room 16, Ps. 20, Grade IV, Act I, Vol. I, No. 2, Book II, 
Div. Ill, Part IV, Plate III; M. 6; Fr. 5. 

But do not capitalize such minor subdivisions of 
publications as 

sec 4, scene i, art. "Evidence," chap. 2 (ii), p. 7 (vii), 
vs. n, 1. 5, n. 6. (See no.) 

38. The first word of a cited speech (or thought) in 
direct discourse, whether preceded by a colon or a 
comma (on this see 131): 

On leaving he remarked: "Never shall I forget this day"; 
With the words, "Never shall I forget this day," he departed; 
I thought to myself: This day I shall never forget (without 
quotation marks). 

39. In resolutions, the first words following " WHEREAS" 
and "Resolved": 

WHEREAS, It has pleased God . . . . ; therefore be it 
Resolved, That .... 

40. The exclamations "O" and "Oh" (see 117): 

"O Lord!" "I know not, Oh, I know not!" "Oh, that I 
were home again!" 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 1 9 

41. All the principal words (i.e., nouns, pronouns, 
adjectives, adverbs, verbs, first and last words) in 
English titles of publications (books, pamphlets, doc- 
uments, periodicals, reports, proceedings, etc.), and 
their divisions (parts, chapters, sections, poems, 
articles, etc.) ; in subjects of lectures, papers, toasts, 
etc.; in cap-and-small-cap and italic center-heads 
(both of which, however, should be avoided), and 
bold-face cut-in heads and side-heads; in cap-and- 
small-cap box-heads in tables (see 279-83) : 

The Men Who Made the Nation; The American College 
Its Past and Present; the Report of the Committee oj Nine; 
"In the Proceedings of the National Education Association 
for 1907 there appeared a paper entitled, 'The Financial 
Value of Education.'" 

NOTE. The Botanical Gazette capitalizes only first words and 
proper names; and the practice may properly be followed in 
general bibliographies, such as are to be found under the title 
"Literature Cited" in the Botanical Gazette (see 60). This style 
is very generally followed by librarians and others in the com- 
pilation of lists of books and publications. 

42. In foreign titles, in addition to capitalizing the first 
word, follow these general rules: 

a) In Latin, capitalize proper nouns, and adjectives 

derived therefrom: 

De amicitia, Bettum Gallicum. 

6) In French, Italian, Spanish, Swedish, and Nor- 
wegian titles, capitalize proper nouns but not ad- 
jectives derived therefrom : 



20 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Histoire de la litterature franfaise, Novelle e racconti popolari 
iialiani, Antologia de poetas liricos castellanos, Svenska littera- 
turens historic. 

c} In German and Danish, capitalize all nouns but 
not the adjectives, except German adjectives derived 
from the names of persons: 

Geschichte des deutschen Feudalwesens (but: die Homer ische 
Frage), Videnskabens Fremskridt i detnittende Aarhundrede; 
and in abbreviations, B.P.W. for Berliner philologische 
W ochenschrift. 

d) In Dutch, capitalize all nouns, and all adjectives 
derived from proper nouns: 
Geschiedenis der Nederlandsche Taal. 

43. In mentioning titles of newspapers, magazines, and 
similar publications, do not, as a rule, treat the 
definite article as part of the title: 

the Chicago Tribune, the School Review, the Annual Register 
of the University of Chicago. 

44. Titles of ancient manuscripts (singular, MS; plural, 
MSS) (see 60): 

Codex Bernensis, Cod. Canonicianus. 

45. In titles with the main words capitalized, all nouns 
forming parts of hyphenated compounds: 

"Twentieth-Century Progress," "The Economy of High- 
Speed Trains." 

But do not capitalize such components when other 
than nouns: 

Fifty-first Street, "Lives of Well-known Authors," "World- 
Dominion of English-speaking Peoples." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 21 

And in side-heads do not capitalize any but the first 
word and proper nouns (see 56 and 172). 

46. In botanical, geological, zoological, and paleonto- 
logical matter, the scientific (Latin) names of divi- 
sions, orders, families, and genera, but not their 
English derivatives: 

Cotylosauria, but: cotylosaurs; Felidae, but: felids; 
Carnivora, but: carnivores. 

Also in botanical and zoological matter, the names 
of species, if derived from names of persons, or 
from generic names; but in geological and medical 
matter the names of species are never capitalized: 

Felis leo, Cocos nucifera, Rosa Carolina, Parkinsonia Torrey- 
ana, Styrax californica, Lythrum hyssopifolia, Phyleuma 
Halleri, Car ex Halleriana (but [geological] : Pterygomatopus 
schmidti, Conodectus favosus). (See 71.) 

47. The names and epithets of peoples, races, and tribes: 

Kafir, Negro (in its ethnic sense), Hottentot, Makassar, 
Buginese, Celestials. 

48. In astronomical work, the names of the bodies of 
the planets, stars, and groups of stars (but not 
"sun," "earth," "moon," "stars"); designations 
of celestial objects in well-known catalogues ; also 
the Flams teed numbers: 

Saturn, Ursa Major, the Milky Way, the Great Bear; 
M 13 (for No. 13 of Messier's Catalogue of Nebulae and 
Clusters). Bond 619, N.G.C. 6165, B.D.-i8487i; 85 
Pegasi, Lalande 5761. 



22 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

49. Divisions, departments, officers, and courses of 
study of the University of Chicago, in all official 
work dealing with its administration or curricula: 

(the University), the School of Education (the School), the 
University Extension Division (but: the division), the Depart- 
ment of Anthropology (also: the Department); the Board 
of Trustees (the Trustees, the Board), the Senate, the 
Council, University College (also: the College), the School 
of Commerce and Administration (also: the School), the 
Faculty of the College of Commerce and Administration, 
Dean of the Faculties (also: the Faculty); .the President, 
the Recorder, Professor of Physics, Assistant in Chemistry, 
Fellow, Scholar; the Van Husen Scholarship (but: the 
scholarship); courses in Political Economy, Autumn Quarter 
(but: a quarter), First Term (but: two terms; major, minor); 
[Hall (referring to the University dormitories)]. 

USE CAPITALS AND SMALL CAPITALS FOR 

50. The names of town and state in the date line, and 
the salutatory phrase at the beginning, of letters, 
and the signature and residence at the end of letters 
or articles, etc.: 

CHICAGO, ILL., January i, 1911 

(Set to the right, with one em's indention, and preferably in 
smaller type than the body of the letter.) 

MY DEAR MR. SMITH: 

(Set flush, followed by a colon, in the same type as the body 
of the letter, and in a separate line, unless preceded by 
another line giving the name and address, in which case it 




MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 23 

should be run in with the text of the letter, indented as a 
paragraph [see 64].) 

CHARLES W. SCOTT 

(Set to the right, with one em's indention, and in the same 
type as the body of the letter or article.) 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 

CAMBRIDGE, MASS. 

June 7, 1911 

(Set to the left, with two ems' indention, in smaller type.) 
(Each line of the address should be in caps and small caps, 
and should be centered on the one preceding. The date 
should be in caps and lower case, likewise centered on those 
above.) 

51. In resolutions, the word "WHEREAS" (see 39); in 
notes (not footnotes), the word "NOTE," which 
should be followed by a period and a dash; in con- 
stitutions, by-laws, etc., the word "SECTION" intro- 
ducing paragraphs and followed by a number: 

NOTE. It should be noticed that .... 

SECTION i. This association shall be styled .... 

The usual practice is to abbreviate the word 
"section" each time it is used in such a connection 
except the first: 

SECTION i. The name of the association .... 
SEC. 2. The object of the association .... 

SET IN SMALL CAPITALS 

52. A.M. and P.M. (ante and post meridiem), and B.C. 
and A.D. ("before Christ" and anno Domini); these 



24 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

should be set without a space between (see 22, 

103, 106, 219): 

11:30 A.M.; 53 B.C., 1906 A.D. 

USE SMALL (i.e., "lower-case") INITIAL LETTER FOR 

53. Words of common usage, originally proper names, 
and their derivatives in whose present, generalized 
acceptation the origin has become obscured, and 
generally all verbs derived from proper names 
(see i) : 

Utopia, bohemian, philistine, titanic, platonic, quixotic, 
bonanza, china, morocco, guinea-pig, boycott, roman (type), 
italicize, anglicize, macadamize, paris green. 

54. In literary references, such minor subdivisions and 
their abbreviations as 

chapter, section, page, article, verse, line, note; chap., sec., 
p., art., vs., 1., n. (See 37, no, and 237.) 

55. Units of measurement as 

h.=hour, min.=minute, sec.=second; lb.=pound, oz.= 
ounce; yd.=yard, ft. = foot; etc. 

56. In side-heads, all but the first word and proper 
names (see 172 and 280). 

57. The first word of a quotation which, through a con- 
junction or otherwise, is immediately connected with 
what precedes, even if such word in the original 
begins a sentence. 

For illustration and exception see 35 and 131. 
