THE GIFT OF 

FLORENCE V. V. DICKEY 

TO THE 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
AT LOS ANGELES 




THE DONALD R. DICKEY 

LIBRARY 
OF VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 



A MANUAL OF STYLE 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



THE BAKER AND TAYLOR COMPANY 

KEW YORK 

THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LOSDOH 

THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA 

TOSTO, OSAKA, ETOTO, FUIUOKA, SIVDAI 

THE MISSION BOOK COMPANY 

SHAK8HAI 



A MANUAL OF STYLE 



A COMPILATION OF 

TYPOGRAPHICAL RULES GOVERNING THE PUBLICATIONS OF 

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, WITH SPECIMENS OF 

TYPES USED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 



SEVENTH EDITION 




THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



COPYRIGHT 1906, 1910, 1911, 1914, W7, 1010, AND 1920 Bv 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 



All Rights Reserved 



Published November 1906 

Second Edition March 1910 

Third Edition December 1911 

Second Impression August 1912 

Fourth Edition February 1914 

Fifth Edition November 1917 

Sixth Edition October 1919 

Seventh Edition November 1920 

Second Impression January 1923 



Composed and Printed By 

The University of Chicago Press 

Chicago. Illinois, U.S.A. 



SRI* 
imc 

5137lo 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

The present work is a codification of the typographical 
rules employed by the University of Chicago in connection 
with its official printing and publications issued through 
its University Press. Having its genesis, over two 
decades ago, in a single sheet of fundamentals, jotted 
down by the first proofreader at odd moments for his 
own guidance; added to from year to year, as oppor- 
tunity offered or new necessities arose; revised and 
re-revised as the scope of the work, and, it is hoped, the 
wisdom of the workers, increased it emerges in its present 
form as the embodiment of traditions, the crystallization 
of usages, the blended product of the reflections of many 
minds. 

Regulations like these, hi the nature of the case, 
cannot be endowed with the fixity of unchanging law. 
They are meant for the average case, and must be 
applied with a certain degree of elasticity. Exceptions 
will constantly occur, and ample room is left for individual 
initiative and discretion. They point the way and survey 
the road, rather than remove the obstacles. Throughout 
this book it is assumed that no regulation contained therein 
is absolutely inviolable. Wherever the peculiar nature of 
the subject-matter, the desirability of throwing into relief 
a certain part of the argument, the reasonable preference 



501579 . 



vi INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

of a writer, or a typographical contingency suggests a 
deviation, such deviation may legitimately be made. Each 
case of this character must be decided largely upon its 
own merits. Generally it may be stated that, where no 
question of taste or logic is involved, deference should 
be shown to the expressed wishes of the author. 

The nature of the work of the Press itself and this 
will apply, to a greater or less extent, to any similar in- 
stitution affected by local conditions constantly calls for 
modification, now of this rule, now of that. It would be 
found impracticable, even were it desirable, to bring all 
its publications into rigid uniformity of "style" and 
appearance. Methods have been devised, systems evolved, 
in certain lines of work, which cannot be carried bodily 
over into the field of others. Thus, in the matter of literary 
references, for instance, general practice has established 
certain usages in some of the sciences which it would not 
be advisable to ignore. Similar differences in practice 
may be observed in other directions. These deviations 
from the general rules will be found mentioned at the 
appropriate places in the body of the book. On the whole, 
however, the rules are designed to govern all publications 
sent forth with the official publishing imprint, "The 
University of Chicago Press." 

Concerning the character and contents of the book 
little need be added. Its origin, its primary aim, and its 
limitations, as outlined above, will suggest the bounds of 
its usefulness. It does not pretend to be exhaustive; a 
few things must be taken for granted, and the traditional 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE vn 

territory of the dictionary has only exceptionally been 
invaded. It does not presume to be inflexibly consistent; 
applicability, in the printing-office, is a better test than 
iron-clad consistency, and common sense a safer guide 
than abstract logic. It lays no claim to perfection in any 
of its parts; bearing throughout the inevitable earmarks 
of compromise, it will not carry conviction at every point 
to everybody. Neither is it an advocate of any radical 
scheme of reform; in the present state of the agitation 
for changes in spelling, progressive conservatism has 
been thought to be more appropriate for an academic 
printing-office than radicalism. As it stands, this Manual 
is believed to contain a fairly comprehensive, reasonably 
harmonious, and wholesomely practical set of work-rules 
for the aid of those who have to do with questions of 
typographical style. For the benefit of those whose duties 
bring them into direct contact with the manufacturing 
department of the Press, specimen pages of the available 
types, special characters, etc., have been added. 

The Manual of Style is now in its seventh edition. 
That it is recognized as possessing merit is evidenced by 
its adoption and use in many editorial offices, libraries, 
and proofrooms in the United States and Canada. 
This edition incorporates several new rules which it is 
believed will prove helpful, and at the same time seeks 
to elucidate some of the older rules, in the application 
of which difficulties may arise. Changes in literary 
practice, the legislation of learned societies, the recent 
development of the profession of the librarian, with the 



Viii INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

attendant uniformity of practice recommended by the 
national association of librarians, and the added experi- 
ence resulting from a daily application of these rules to 
a very varied list of publications, are all factors con- 
tributing to the need of periodical revision. 

The work, thus remodeled, is again offered to the 
public, in the hope that it may continue to be useful 
to those whose occupations require some familiarity with 
the niceties of typographical form. 

THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

CHICAGO, ILL. 
November, 1920 



CONTENTS 

FAGS 

RULES FOR COMPOSITION i 

Capitalization 3 

The Use of Italics 25 

Quotations 33 

Spelling . . 37 

Punctuation 50 

Divisions 81 

Footnotes 88 

Indexing 92 

Tabular Work 95 

TECHNICAL TERMS 103 

APPENDIX 119 

Hints to Authors and Editors 121 

Hints to Proofreaders 125 

Hints to Copyholders 130 

Proofreader's Marks 133 

SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 135 

INDEXES 283 

Index to Manual 285 

Index to Types, etc 299 



RULES FOR COMPOSITION 



CAPITALIZATION 

CAPITALIZE 

1. Proper nouns and adjectives: 

George, America, North America, Englishman; Elizabethan, 
French. (See 53.) 

Do not capitalize verbs derived from proper names 
and having a specialized meaning: 

to boycott, to fletcherize, to pasteurize; 

nor such words as the following, when used in 

their special scientific or trade significance: 

volt, ampere, angstrom, farad, watt, henry, ohm, coulomb. 

2. Epithets used as substitutes for proper names, or 
affixed to a name: 

the Pretender, Bloody Mary, Richard the Lion-hearted, 
Alexander the Great. 

3. The particles in French names, a: "le," "la," "de," 
"du," when they are not preceded by a Christian 
name or title; but do not capitalize them when 
they are preceded by such name or title: 

Le Bossu, La Torre, La Rochelle, De Coligny, D'Aubigne*, 
Du Maurier (but: Rene le Bossu, Miguel de la Torre, 
Gaspard de Coligny, Thomas d'Aubigne, George du 
Maurier). 

3 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Capitalize "Van" in Dutch names; do not capi- 
talize "von" in German names unless it begins a 
sentence: 

Stephen Van Rensselaer; Hugo von Martius, von Dobschiitz. 

NOTE. Personal preference is responsible for the following ex- 
ceptions: Henry van Dyke, J. H. van't Hoff, A. van Maanen. 

4. Generic terms forming a part of geographical names: 

Atlantic Ocean, Dead Sea, Baffin's Bay, Gulf of Mexico, 
Straits of Gibraltar, Straits Settlements, Mississippi River, 
Three Rivers, Laughing Brook, Rocky Mountains, Blue 
Hills, Pike's Peak, Mount of Olives, Great Desert, Death 
Valley, Prince Edward Island, Sea (Lake) of Galilee. 

But do not capitalize words of this class when simply 
added by way of description to the specific name, 
without forming an organic part of such name: 

the river Elbe, the desert of Sahara, the island of Madagascar. 

Subject to the rule above, the following lists will be 
found useful (see 104) : 

CAPITALIZE, IN SINGULAR FORM ONLY, WHEN IMMEDIATELY 
FOLLOWING NAME 



Archipelago 
Borough 
Branch (stream) 
Butte 


Fork 
Gap 
Glacier 
Gulch 


Park 
Plateau 
Range 
Reservation 


Canyon 
County 
Crater 


Harbor 
Head 
Hollow 


Ridge 
River 
Run 


Creek 
Delta 


Mesa 
Ocean 


Valley 


Forest 


Parish (La.) 





MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 



CAPITALIZE, IN SINGULAR OR PLURAL FORM, WHEN IMME- 
DIATELY FOLLOWING THE NAME 

Hill Mountain Spring 

Island Narrows 



CAPITALIZE, IN SINGULAR FORM, EITHER BEFORE OR AFTER 
THE NAME; AND IN PLURAL FORM BEFORE THE NAME 

Bay Fort Peak 

Bayou Isle Point 

Camp (military) Lake Port 

Cape Mount Sea 

Dalles Oasis Strait 

Desert Pass Volcano 
Falls 

5. Adjectives and nouns used singly or in conjunction, 
to distinguish definite regions, and when used in 
connection with a recognized geographical term; 
and also terms applied to groups of states: 

Old World, Western Hemisphere, Continental Europe, the 
Continent (to distinguish it from the British Isles), North 
Pole, Equator, the North ( = Scandinavia), the East (the 
Orient), the Far East, the Levant; the North, South, East, 
West, Middle West (United States) ; Northern Europe (but : 
southern California); North Atlantic states, Gulf states, 
Pacific Coast states. 

But do not, as a rule, capitalize adjectives derived 
from such names or nouns simply designating 
direction or point of compass: 

oriental customs, the southern states, the middle western 
states, a southerner (but: Northman = Scandinavian) ; an 
invasion of barbarians from the north, extending through 
the south of Europe. 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

In order that a distinction may be made between 
a local and a world-wide application, the latter 
should be capitalized: 

Eastern peoples (i.e., peoples of the Orient); Western 
nations. 

6. Generic terms for political divisions: 

(1) when the term is an organic part of the name, 
following the proper name directly : 

Holy Roman Empire, German Empire (=Deutsches Reich), 
French Republic (=Republique franfaise), United Kingdom, 
Northwest Territory, Cook County, Evanston Township, 
Kansas City (New York City exception). 

(2) when, with the preposition "of," it is used as 
an integral part of the name to indicate certain 
minor administrative subdivisions in the United 
States: 

Department of the Lakes, Town of Lake, Borough of Man- 
hattan. 

(3) when used singly as the accepted designation 
for a specific division: 

the Union, the States, the Republic (= United States), [the 
Confederacy], the Dominion (= Canada), the West Side. 

(4) when it is part of a fanciful or popular appel- 
lation used as if a real geographical name : 

Celestial Empire, Holy (Promised) Land, Badger State, 
Eternal City, Garden City. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 7 

But do not (with the exceptions noted) capitalize such 
terms when standing alone, or when, with "of," 
preceding the specific name: 

the empire, the state; empire of Russia, kingdom of Servia, 
duchy of Anhalt, state of Illinois, county of Cook, city of 
Chicago; but: the Empire (meaning the Roman Empire). 

7. Numbered political divisions (see 100) : 

Eleventh Congressional District, First Ward, Second Precinct. 

8. The names of thoroughfares, parks, squares, blocks, 
buildings, etc. (see 100) : 

Drexel Avenue, Rings trasse, Via Appia, Chicago Drainage 
Canal; Lincoln Park; Trafalgar Square; Monadnock 
Block; Lakeside Building, Capitol, White House, County 
Hospital, Theatre Francais, Lexington Hotel, Masonic 
Temple [Solomon's temple, but, when standing alone: the 
Temple]. 

But do not capitalize such general designations of 
buildings as "courthouse," "post-office," "library," 
etc., except in connection with the name of the place 
in which they are located, when they thus form a 
proper name. 

9. The names of political parties, religious denomina- 
tions or sects, and philosophical, literary, and artistic 
schools, and their adherents: 

Republican, Conservative, National Liberal, Social Democ- 
racy (where, as in Continental Europe, it is organized as 
a distinct parliamentary faction); Christian, Protestantism 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Evangelical Lutheran, Catholic, Reformed, Greek Orthodox, 
Anabaptist, Seventh-Day Adventists, the Establishment, 
High Church, High Churchman, Separatist, Nonconform- 
ist, Dissenter, Papist, Ultramontane, Theosophist, Jew, 
Gentile as a noun, Pharisee (but: scribe) (adjective: 
Pharisaic, but : pharisaic, when used of characteristics, and 
not of the sect itself); Epicurean, Stoic, Gnosticism (but: 
neo-Platonism, pseudo-Christianity, un-Christian see 203, 
208), Literalist; the Romantic movement, the Symbolic 
school of painters. 

But do not capitalize any of the foregoing or similar 
words, or their derivatives, when used in their origi- 
nal or acquired general sense of pervading spirit, 
point of view, trend of thought, attitude of mind, or 
mode of action: 

republican form of government, a true democrat and a con- 
servative statesman, socialism as an economic panacea, the 
communistic theory, single-taxer, anarchism; catholicity of 
mind, puritanical ideas, evangelical spirit, pharisaic super- 
ciliousness; deist, pantheism, rationalist; epicurean tastes, 
stoic endurance, dualism and monism in present-day philoso- 
phy, an altruistic world-view; the classics, a nemesis. 

10. The names of monastic orders and their members: 
Black Friars, Dominican, Jesuit. 

11. The proper (official) titles of social, religious, educa- 
tional, political, commercial, and industrial organiza- 
tions and institutions: 

Union League Club, Knights Templar; Young People's 
Society of Christian Endeavor, Associated Charities; Smith- 
sonian Institution, State University of Iowa, Hyde Park High 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 9 

School; the Commercial Academy (Handelsakademie) of 
Leipzig, the Paris Lyceum (Lycee de Paris); the Forty 
[Immortals]; Cook County Democracy, Tammany Hall; 
Associated Press, Typographical Union No. 16; Chicago, 
Milwaukee & St. Paul Railroad, The Macmillan Company. 

But do not capitalize such generic terms when used 
to designate a class; nor when standing alone, even 
if applied to a specific institution, except to avoid 
ambiguity or, rarely, where the word is consistently 
and clearly used in place of the true name : 

young people's societies, the high school at Lemont, local 
typographical unions; the club, the association, the company; 
but: "He joined the Hall [Tammany]," "a member of the 
[French] Academy." (See 49.) 

12. The names of legislative, judiciary, and administra- 
tive bodies and governmental departments, and their 
branches, when specifically applied: 

Congress (Senate, House of Representatives [the House], 
Committee of Ways and Means), Parliament (House of 
Lords, House of Commons), Reichstag, Chamber of Deputies 
(the Chamber), General Assembly of Illinois, Chicago City 
Council, South Park Commissioners; Supreme Court of the 
United States, Circuit Court of Cook County, [Sanhedrin]; 
Department of the Interior, Census Office, Springfield Board 
of Education, Department of Public Works, the United 
States Army (but : he has served in the army; an army man). 

But do not capitalize such general, paraphrastic, or 
incomplete designations as 

the national assembly, the legislature of the state, the upper 
house of Congress, the Dutch diet; the council, the depart- 
ment, the board. 



10 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

13. Ordinals used to designate Egyptian dynasties, 
sessions of Congress, names of regiments, and in 
similar connections (see 100) : 

the Eighteenth Dynasty (but: the Ming dynasty), the 
Fifty-third Congress, the Second Illinois Regiment Band. 

14. Commonly accepted appellations for historical 
epochs, periods in the history of a language or 
literature, and geological ages and strata, the word 
"age" itself being capitalized only where a failure 
to do so would result in ambiguous meaning: 

Neolithic age (but: Stone Age, Middle Ages), Crusades, 
Renaissance, Reformation, Inquisition, Commonwealth 
(Cromwell's), Commune (Paris); Old English (OE see 
123), Middle High German (MHG), the Age of Elizabeth; 
Pleistocene, Silurian, Lower Carboniferous, Christian Era. 

But do not capitalize informal adjectives in such 
phrases as 

early Algonkian, late Permian. 

15. Names of important events: 

Thirty Years' War, Peasants' War (German), Revolution 
(French), Revolutionary War or War of Independence 
(American), Whiskey Insurrection (American), Civil War 
(American), War of 1812, Franco-Prussian War, Battle of 
Gettysburg; Peace of Utrecht, Louisiana Purchase. 

16. Political alliances, and such terms from secular or 
ecclesiastical history as have, through their associa- 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION II 

tions, acquired special significance as designations 
for parties, classes, movements, etc. (see 9) : 

Protestant League, Holy Alliance, Dreibund; the Roses, the 
Roundheads, Independents, Independency (English history), 
Nonconformist, Dissenter, Separatist. 

17. Conventions, congresses, expositions,etc. : 

Council of Nicaea, Parliament of Religions, Fifteenth Inter- 
national Congress of Criminology, Westminster Assembly, 
Chicago World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition. 

18. Titles of specific treaties, acts, laws (juridical), 
bills, etc.: 

Treaty of Verdun, Art. V of the Peace of Prague, Edict of 
Nantes, Concordat, the Constitution (of the United States, 
when standing alone, or when referred to as a literary docu- 
ment; but not usually that of any other state or country, e.g., 
the constitution of Illinois), Declaration of Independence, 
Act of Emancipation, Magna C(h)arta, Corn Laws, Reform 
Bill (English), Fourteenth Amendment, Sherman Anti- 
trust Law (but not such bills as have not yet become laws 
nor such treaties or laws when cited otherwise than under 
their formal titles: treaty at Versailles, Food bill). 

19. Creeds and confessions of faith: 

Apostles' Creed, Nicene Creed (but: ante-Nicene see 203, 
208), Augsburg Confession, Thirty-nine Articles. 

20. Civic holidays and ecclesiastical fast and feast days : 
Fourth of July (the Fourth), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day; 
Easter, Passover, Feast of Tabernacles, New Year's Day. 

21. Titles of honor and respect, whether religious, 
civil, or military, preceding the name, and academic 



12 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

degrees following the name; all titles of honor or 
of nobility, when referring to specific persons, 
either preceding the name or used in place of the 
proper name; familiar names applied to particular 
persons; orders (decorations) and the titles accom- 
panying them; titles, without the name, used in 
direct address; titles without the name when used 
of existing incumbents of office; and such words 
as "President," "King," "Sultan," and "Pope," 
standing alone, when referring to a specific ruler 
or incumbent: 

Queen Victoria, ex-President Cleveland, Rear-Admiral 
Dewey, Brigadier General Brown, Lieutenant Commander 
Smith; United States Commissioner of Education Harris, 
Dr. Davis; Father Boniface, Deacon Smith; Timothy 
Dwight, D.D., LL.D. ; James Brown, Doctor of Philosophy; 
Thomas Graham, Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society; 
the Prince of Wales, the Marquis of Lome, His Majesty, 
His Grace; the Apostle to the Gentiles, "the Father of his 
Country"; Order of the Red Eagle, Knight Commander 
of the Bath; "Allow me to suggest, Judge . . . ."; the 
Bishop of London; the Senator; "The President [of the 
United States] was chosen arbitrator," "the Pope's policy." 

But do not capitalize the official title of a person 
when the title follows the name (see 49); when 
standing alone, without the name (with the excep- 
tions noted above, and see 49) ; or when, followed 
by the name, it is preceded by the article "the": 

Woodrow Wilson, president of the United States; B. L. 
Gildersleeve, professor of Greek (see 49); Ferdinand W. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 13 

Peck, commissioner-general to the Paris Exposition; the 
archbishop (meaning other than the existing incumbent), 
the senator (when not speaking of the existing member), 
the archduke Francis Ferdinand, the apostle Paul. 

22. Abbreviations like Ph.D., M.P., and F.R.G.S., and 

designations of celestial objects (see 48) (such 
titles to be set without space between the letters) 
(see 52, 103, 106). 

23. Abbreviations consisting of one letter, except in 
case of units of measurement and minor literary 
subdivisions (see 54, 55, no, in): 

R.V. (Revised Version), F. (Fahrenheit), C. (centigrade), 
A (angstrom units) (but: p., 1., n., etc.). 

24. Nouns and adjectives used to designate the Supreme 
Being or Power, or any member of the Christian 
Trinity; and all pronouns referring to the same, 
when not closely preceded or followed by a dis- 
tinctive name, or unless such reference is otherwise 
perfectly clear: 

the Almighty, Ruler of the universe, the First Cause, the 
Absolute, Providence (personified), Father, Son, Holy Ghost, 
the Spirit, Savior, Messiah, Son of Man, the Logos, [and 
the Virgin Mary]; "Trust Him who rules all things" (but: 
"When God had worked six days, he rested on the seventh"). 

But do not capitalize such expressions and deriva- 
tives as 

(God's) fatherhood, (Jesus') sonship, messiahship, messianic 
hope, christological (but: Christology). 



14 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

25. Words which have an acquired, limited, or special 
meaning: 

the Doctor's degree; a report of the Master (in chancery); 
a Bachelor's hood; a Freshman. 

But do not capitalize such expressions as 
the doctorate, a master in chancery (the last two words being 
explanatory, the capitalization of "master" is here no longer 
necessary to indicate a special meaning). 

26. "Nature" and similar terms, and abstract ideas, 
when personified: 

"Nature wields her scepter mercilessly"; "Vice in the old 
English morality plays." 

27. "Father" used for church father, and "reformers" 
used of Reformation leaders, whenever the meaning 
otherwise would be ambiguous: 

the Fathers, the early Fathers, the Greek Fathers, [Pilgrim 
Fathers], the Reformers (but: the church reformers of the 
fifteenth century). 

28. The word "church" in properly cited titles of 
nationally organized bodies of believers in which, 
through historical associations, it has become insepa- 
rably linked with the name of a specific locality; or 
when forming part of the name of a particular 
edifice: 

Church of Rome, Church of England, High Church; Church 
of the Holy Sepulcher, Fifth Avenue Baptist Church, First 
Methodist Church. 

But do not capitalize, except as noted above, when 
standing alone, in any sense universal, national, 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 15 

local or when the name is not correctly or fully 
quoted : 

the church (= organized Christianity), the Eastern (Greek 
Orthodox) church, the Roman Catholic church, the estab- 
lished church (but: the Establishment), the state church; the 
Baptist church in Englewood. 

NOTE. In exceptional cases, where the opposition of Church 
and State constitutes a fundamental part of the argument, and 
it is desired to lend force to this antithesis, emphasis may be added 
by capitalizing the two words. 

29. Names for the Bible and other sacred books: 

(Holy, Sacred) Scriptures, Holy Writ, Word of God, Book of 
Books; Koran, Vedas, Mishna, the Upanishads; Apocrypha. 

But do not capitalize adjectives derived from such 

nouns : 

biblical, scriptural, koranic, vedic, talmudic, apocryphal. 

30. Versions and editions of the Bible: 

King James's Version, Authorized Version (A.V.), Revised 
Version (R.V.), Polychrome Bible, Septuagint (LXX), 
Peshitto. 

31. Books and divisions of the Bible and of other sacred 
books (Christian or otherwise) (see 60) : 

Old Testament, Pentateuch, Exodus, II (Second) Kings, 
Book of Job, Psalms (Psalter), the [Mosaic] Law and the 
[writings of the] Prophets, Minor Prophets, Wisdom Literature, 
Gospel of Luke, Synoptic Gospels, Fourth Gospel, Acts of 
the Apostles (the Acts), Epistle to the Romans, Pastoral 
Epistles, Apocalypse (Revelation), Sermon on the Mount, 
Beatitudes, Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments (Decalogue), 
Judith, Bel and the Dragon, the Koran, the Vedas. 



1 6 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

But do not capitalize words like "book," "gospel," 
"epistle," "psalm" in such connections as 

the five books of Moses, the first forty psalms, the gospels 
and epistles of the New Testament, [the synoptic problem, 
the synoptists], the biblical apocalypses. 

32. Biblical parables: 

the parable of the Prodigal Son. 

33. Such miscellaneous terms as 

Last Supper, Eucharist, the Passion, the Twelve (apostles), 
the Seventy (disciples), the Servant, the Day of Yahweh, the 
Chronicler, the Psalmist, the Golden Rule, the Kingdom of 
God, or of Heaven. 

34. The first word of a sentence, and in poetry the first 
word of each line: 

In summer, on the headlands, 

The Baltic Sea along, 
Sit Neckan, with his harp of gold, 

And sings his plaintive song. 

But in Greek and Latin poetry capitalize only the 
first word of a paragraph, not of each verse (line) : 

Town 8' dotSos aeiSe irepixAvTos, ot Sc cruairrj 
eurr' axouovTCs' 6 8' 'A^atwv voarov aeiSev, 
Avypdv, ov fK TpoirjS eTreretXaro IlaAAas 'Adrivrj. 

TOV 8' VTTp(l)l6$V <f>p<TL (TVvOeTO QicrinV (ZOtS^V 

Kovprj 'iKoptoio, Trcpu^pwv II^veXoTreta' 

Talia praefantes quondam felicia Pelei 
carmina diuino cecinerunt pectore Parcae 
praesentes: namque ante domos inuisere castas 
heroum et sese mortali ostendere coetu 
caelicolae nondum spreta pietate solebant 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 17 

35. The first word after a colon only when introducing 
a complete passage, or sentence which would have 
independent meaning, as in summarizations and 
quotations not closely connected with what precedes; 
or where the colon has the weight of such expres- 
sion as "as follows," "namely," "for instance," or 
a similar phrase, and is followed by a logically com- 
plete sentence: 

"In conclusion I wish to say: It will be seen from the above 
that ...."; "As the old proverb has it: 'Haste makes 
waste'"; "My theory is: The moment the hot current strikes 
the surface . . . ." 

But do not capitalize the first word of a quotation if 
immediately connected with what precedes (unless, 
as the first word of a sentence, beginning a paragraph 
in reduced type) ; or the first word after a colon, if 
an implied "namely," or a similar term, is followed 
by a brief explanatory phrase, logically dependent 
upon the preceding clause: 

"The old adage is true that 'haste makes waste'"; "Two 
explanations present themselves: either he came too late for 
the train, or he was detained at the station." 

36. As a rule, the first word in sections of an enumera- 
tion, if any one link contains two or more distinct 
clauses, separated by a semicolon, colon, or period, 
unless all are dependent upon the same term pre- 
ceding and leading up to them (see 138) : 

His reasons for refusal were three: (i) He did not have the 
time. (2) He did not have the means; or, at any rate, had no 



l8 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

funds available at the moment. (3) He doubted the feasi- 
bility of the plan. But: He objected that (i) he did not 
have the time; (2) he did not have the means; or, at any 
rate, had no funds available; (3) he doubted the feasibility 
of the plan. 

37. As a rule, nouns followed by a numeral particu- 
larly a capitalized Roman numeral indicating 
their order in a sequence; also sums of money in 
German and French: 

Room 16, Ps. 20, Grade IV, Act I, Vol. I, No. 2, Book II, 
Div. Ill, Part IV, Plate III; M. 6; Fr. 5. 

But do not capitalize such minor subdivisions of 
publications as 

sec 4, scene i, art. "Evidence," chap. 2 (ii), p. 7 (vii), 
vs. n, 1. 5, n. 6. (See no.) 

38. The first word of a cited speech (or thought) in 
direct discourse, whether preceded by a colon or a 
comma (on this see 131): 

On leaving he remarked: "Never shall I forget this day"; 
With the words, "Never shall I forget this day," he departed; 
I thought to myself: This day I shall never forget (without 
quotation marks). 

39. In resolutions, the first words following " WHEREAS" 
and "Resolved": 

WHEREAS, It has pleased God . . . . ; therefore be it 
Resolved, That .... 

40. The exclamations "O" and "Oh" (see 117): 

"O Lord!" "I know not, Oh, I know not!" "Oh, that I 
were home again!" 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 1 9 

41. All the principal words (i.e., nouns, pronouns, 
adjectives, adverbs, verbs, first and last words) in 
English titles of publications (books, pamphlets, doc- 
uments, periodicals, reports, proceedings, etc.), and 
their divisions (parts, chapters, sections, poems, 
articles, etc.) ; in subjects of lectures, papers, toasts, 
etc.; in cap-and-small-cap and italic center-heads 
(both of which, however, should be avoided), and 
bold-face cut-in heads and side-heads; in cap-and- 
small-cap box-heads in tables (see 279-83) : 

The Men Who Made the Nation; The American College 
Its Past and Present; the Report of the Committee oj Nine; 
"In the Proceedings of the National Education Association 
for 1907 there appeared a paper entitled, 'The Financial 
Value of Education.'" 

NOTE. The Botanical Gazette capitalizes only first words and 
proper names; and the practice may properly be followed in 
general bibliographies, such as are to be found under the title 
"Literature Cited" in the Botanical Gazette (see 60). This style 
is very generally followed by librarians and others in the com- 
pilation of lists of books and publications. 

42. In foreign titles, in addition to capitalizing the first 
word, follow these general rules: 

a) In Latin, capitalize proper nouns, and adjectives 

derived therefrom: 

De amicitia, Bettum Gallicum. 

6) In French, Italian, Spanish, Swedish, and Nor- 
wegian titles, capitalize proper nouns but not ad- 
jectives derived therefrom : 



20 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Histoire de la litterature franfaise, Novelle e racconti popolari 
iialiani, Antologia de poetas liricos castellanos, Svenska littera- 
turens historic. 

c} In German and Danish, capitalize all nouns but 
not the adjectives, except German adjectives derived 
from the names of persons: 

Geschichte des deutschen Feudalwesens (but: die Homer ische 
Frage), Videnskabens Fremskridt i detnittende Aarhundrede; 
and in abbreviations, B.P.W. for Berliner philologische 
W ochenschrift. 

d) In Dutch, capitalize all nouns, and all adjectives 
derived from proper nouns: 
Geschiedenis der Nederlandsche Taal. 

43. In mentioning titles of newspapers, magazines, and 
similar publications, do not, as a rule, treat the 
definite article as part of the title: 

the Chicago Tribune, the School Review, the Annual Register 
of the University of Chicago. 

44. Titles of ancient manuscripts (singular, MS; plural, 
MSS) (see 60): 

Codex Bernensis, Cod. Canonicianus. 

45. In titles with the main words capitalized, all nouns 
forming parts of hyphenated compounds: 

"Twentieth-Century Progress," "The Economy of High- 
Speed Trains." 

But do not capitalize such components when other 
than nouns: 

Fifty-first Street, "Lives of Well-known Authors," "World- 
Dominion of English-speaking Peoples." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 21 

And in side-heads do not capitalize any but the first 
word and proper nouns (see 56 and 172). 

46. In botanical, geological, zoological, and paleonto- 
logical matter, the scientific (Latin) names of divi- 
sions, orders, families, and genera, but not their 
English derivatives: 

Cotylosauria, but: cotylosaurs; Felidae, but: felids; 
Carnivora, but: carnivores. 

Also in botanical and zoological matter, the names 
of species, if derived from names of persons, or 
from generic names; but in geological and medical 
matter the names of species are never capitalized: 

Felis leo, Cocos nucifera, Rosa Carolina, Parkinsonia Torrey- 
ana, Styrax californica, Lythrum hyssopifolia, Phyleuma 
Halleri, Car ex Halleriana (but [geological] : Pterygomatopus 
schmidti, Conodectus favosus). (See 71.) 

47. The names and epithets of peoples, races, and tribes: 

Kafir, Negro (in its ethnic sense), Hottentot, Makassar, 
Buginese, Celestials. 

48. In astronomical work, the names of the bodies of 
the planets, stars, and groups of stars (but not 
"sun," "earth," "moon," "stars"); designations 
of celestial objects in well-known catalogues ; also 
the Flams teed numbers: 

Saturn, Ursa Major, the Milky Way, the Great Bear; 
M 13 (for No. 13 of Messier's Catalogue of Nebulae and 
Clusters). Bond 619, N.G.C. 6165, B.D.-i8487i; 85 
Pegasi, Lalande 5761. 



22 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

49. Divisions, departments, officers, and courses of 
study of the University of Chicago, in all official 
work dealing with its administration or curricula: 

(the University), the School of Education (the School), the 
University Extension Division (but: the division), the Depart- 
ment of Anthropology (also: the Department); the Board 
of Trustees (the Trustees, the Board), the Senate, the 
Council, University College (also: the College), the School 
of Commerce and Administration (also: the School), the 
Faculty of the College of Commerce and Administration, 
Dean of the Faculties (also: the Faculty); .the President, 
the Recorder, Professor of Physics, Assistant in Chemistry, 
Fellow, Scholar; the Van Husen Scholarship (but: the 
scholarship); courses in Political Economy, Autumn Quarter 
(but: a quarter), First Term (but: two terms; major, minor); 
[Hall (referring to the University dormitories)]. 

USE CAPITALS AND SMALL CAPITALS FOR 

50. The names of town and state in the date line, and 
the salutatory phrase at the beginning, of letters, 
and the signature and residence at the end of letters 
or articles, etc.: 

CHICAGO, ILL., January i, 1911 

(Set to the right, with one em's indention, and preferably in 
smaller type than the body of the letter.) 

MY DEAR MR. SMITH: 

(Set flush, followed by a colon, in the same type as the body 
of the letter, and in a separate line, unless preceded by 
another line giving the name and address, in which case it 




MANUAL OF STYLE: CAPITALIZATION 23 

should be run in with the text of the letter, indented as a 
paragraph [see 64].) 

CHARLES W. SCOTT 

(Set to the right, with one em's indention, and in the same 
type as the body of the letter or article.) 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 

CAMBRIDGE, MASS. 

June 7, 1911 

(Set to the left, with two ems' indention, in smaller type.) 
(Each line of the address should be in caps and small caps, 
and should be centered on the one preceding. The date 
should be in caps and lower case, likewise centered on those 
above.) 

51. In resolutions, the word "WHEREAS" (see 39); in 
notes (not footnotes), the word "NOTE," which 
should be followed by a period and a dash; in con- 
stitutions, by-laws, etc., the word "SECTION" intro- 
ducing paragraphs and followed by a number: 

NOTE. It should be noticed that .... 

SECTION i. This association shall be styled .... 

The usual practice is to abbreviate the word 
"section" each time it is used in such a connection 
except the first: 

SECTION i. The name of the association .... 
SEC. 2. The object of the association .... 

SET IN SMALL CAPITALS 

52. A.M. and P.M. (ante and post meridiem), and B.C. 
and A.D. ("before Christ" and anno Domini); these 



24 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

should be set without a space between (see 22, 

103, 106, 219): 

11:30 A.M.; 53 B.C., 1906 A.D. 

USE SMALL (i.e., "lower-case") INITIAL LETTER FOR 

53. Words of common usage, originally proper names, 
and their derivatives in whose present, generalized 
acceptation the origin has become obscured, and 
generally all verbs derived from proper names 
(see i) : 

Utopia, bohemian, philistine, titanic, platonic, quixotic, 
bonanza, china, morocco, guinea-pig, boycott, roman (type), 
italicize, anglicize, macadamize, paris green. 

54. In literary references, such minor subdivisions and 
their abbreviations as 

chapter, section, page, article, verse, line, note; chap., sec., 
p., art., vs., 1., n. (See 37, no, and 237.) 

55. Units of measurement as 

h.=hour, min.=minute, sec.=second; lb.=pound, oz.= 
ounce; yd.=yard, ft. = foot; etc. 

56. In side-heads, all but the first word and proper 
names (see 172 and 280). 

57. The first word of a quotation which, through a con- 
junction or otherwise, is immediately connected with 
what precedes, even if such word in the original 
begins a sentence. 

For illustration and exception see 35 and 131. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: ITALICS 25 



THE USE OF ITALICS 
ITALICIZE 

58. Words or phrases to which it is desired to lend 
emphasis, importance, etc.: 

"This was, however, not the case"; "It is sufficiently plain 
that the sciences of life, at least, are studies of processes." 

But beware of the excessive use of italics, for the 
appearance of the over-italicized page is not 
pleasing and the too frequent use of italics for 
emphasis weakens the text. See note to 41. 

59. Words and phrases from foreign languages, inserted 
into the English text, and not incorporated into the 
English language; and also (as a rule) single sen- 
tences or brief passages not of sufficient length to 
call for reduced type (see 85) : 

"the Darwinian Weltanschauung"; "Napoleon's coup d'etat"; 
"the debater par excellence of the Senate "; "De gustibus non 
est disputandum, or, as the French have it, Chacun & son 
goto." 

But do not italicize foreign titles preceding names, 
or names of foreign institutions or places the meaning 
or position of which in English would have required 
roman type, and which either are without English 
equivalents or are by preference used in lieu of these: 

Pere Lagrange, Freiherr von Schwenau; the German 
Reichstag, the Champs Elysees, the Museo delle Tenne; 



26 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



nor words of everyday occurrence which have become 
sufficiently anglicized, even though still retaining the 
accents of the original language: 



addendum 


chiaroscuro 


ensemble 


(plur. -da) 


clientele 


entente 


ad interim 


confrere 


entree 


ad lib[itumj 


connoisseur 


entrep6t 


ad valorem 


consensus 


entrepreneur 


aide de camp 


contra 


erratum (plur. -a) 


alias 


contretemps 


et cetera 


alibi 


corrigendum 


ex cathedra 


Alma Mater 


(plur. -da) 


ex officio 


amateur 


coup d'e"tat 


expose 


anno Domini 


coup de grace 


facade 


ante-bellum 


creche 


facsimile 


a posteriori 


criterion (plur. -a) 


faience 


a priori 


cul-de-sac 


fete 


apropos 


datum (plur. -a) 


finis 


atelier 


debris 


fracas 


attache 


debut 


gratis 


au revoir 


decollete 


Gymnasium 


barrage 


delicatessen 


(German) 


bas-relief 


demilune 


habeas corpus 


beau ideal 


demimonde 


habitue 


billet doux 


demirelievo 


hangar 


bona fide 


demi-tasse 


hegira 


bon ton 


denouement 


hors d'ceuvres 


bouillon 


depdt (= deposi- 


innuendo 


bourgeois 


tory) 


laissez faire 


bourgeoisie 


de rigueur 


lese majeste 


bravo 


detour 


levee 


bric-a-brac 


dilettante 


litterateur 


cabaret 


divorcee 


litterati 


cafe 


doctrinaire 


Magna C[h]arta 


camouflage 


dramatis per- 


mandamus 


cantina 


sonae 


marchen 


carte blanche 


eclat 


massage 


chaperon 


elite 


matador 


charge d'affaires 


encore 


matinee 


chauffeur 


ennui 


melange 


chef d'oeuvre 


en route 


melee 



MANUAL OF STYLE: ITALICS 



27 



menu 


portmonnaie 


savant 


milieu 


postmortem (n. 


senor 


mitrailleuse 


and adj.) 


seraglio 


mores 


post obit 


sobriquet 


naive 


prima facie 


soiree 


nee 


pro and con[tra] 


spirituel 


neve 


proces verbal 


stein 


niche 


pro rata 


subpoena 


nil 


protege 


tte-a-tete 


nol[le] pros[equi] 


pro tem[pore] 


tonneau 


nom de plume 


protocol 


ultimatum 


onus 


queue 


umlaut 


papier mache 


quondam 


verbatim 


par excellence 


ragout 


verso 


parvenu 


regime 


versus (v., vs.) 1 


paterfamilias 


rendezvous 


via 


patois 


resume 


vice versa 


per annum 


reveille 


vis-a-vis 


per capita 


role 


vise 


per contra 


sauerkraut 


viva voce 


per se 







1 But italicize v. or vs. when standing between two opposing terms not 
themselves italicized (see 63) when otherwise the meaning would not be clear: 
Michigan vs. Minnesota, 3 to o. 

But do not hyphenate any of these foreign words 
when used as adjectives. 

60. Titles of publications books (including plays, essays, 
cycles of poems, single poems of considerable length, 
and symphonies, usually printed separately, and 
not from the context understood to form parts of a 
large volume [see 81]), pamphlets, treatises, tracts, 
documents, operas, oratorios, and periodicals (in- 
cluding regularly appearing proceedings and trans- 
actions; and also the name of a journal appearing 
in the journal itself, and the word "journal," 
"review," etc., standing alone, if a part of the 



28 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

name of the publication) (see 41) ; and in the case 
of newspapers, periodicals, etc., the name of the 
city (where published) when forming an integral 
part of the name : 

Spencer, Principles of Sociology; A Midsummer-Night's 
Dream; Idylls of the King; Paradise Lost; The Messiah; 
Lohengrin; the Modern Language Review, the Chicago 
Tribune, the Indianapolis Star, Report of the United Slates 
Commissioner of Education, Groningen Publications, No. 27. 

NOTE. The Botanical Gazette uses italics for such titles in the 
text only; in footnotes, roman. Its own name it prints in caps 
and small caps BOTANICAL GAZETTE. 

This rule may be departed from in lengthy biblio- 
graphical lists, in tables, or in other matter where 
to follow it would result in an undue preponder- 
ance of italics (see note to 41). 
Books of the Bible, both canonical and apocryphal, 
and titles of ancient manuscripts should be set in 
roman type, as also symbols used to designate 
manuscripts (see 31 and 44) : 
Psalms 53: 10, Di6, Mb, P, J. 

61. The following words, phrases, and abbreviations 
used in literary and legal references: 

ad loc., circa (ca.), et al., ibid., idem, infra, loc. cit., op. cit., 
passim, sic, sc., supra, s.v., vide. 

But do not italicize 

cf., e.g., i.e., v. or vs. (versus) (unless ambiguity would 
result; see note to 59), viz., etc. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: ITALICS 29 

62. The words See and See also, when used in an index 
or similar compilation, for the purpose of a cross- 
reference, where the differentiation of those words 
from the context is desirable ; and the words for 
and read in lists of errata, to separate them from 
the incorrect and correct readings: 

See also Sociology; for levee read Iev6e. 

63. The names of plaintiff and defendant in the citation 
of legal causes; also the titles of proceedings con- 
taining such prefixes as in re, ex parte, and in the 
matter of, etc. : 

Conolly v. Union Sewer Pipe Co.; In re Smith; Ex parte 
Brown; In the matter of the petition of Henry Robinson for a 
writ of habeas corpus. 

64. Address lines in speeches, reports, etc., and primary 
address lines in letters (set flush, in a separate line, 
with nouns capitalized [see 50]) : 

Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Mr. John Smith, 321 Dearborn Street, Chicago, III. 
DEAR SIR: I take pleasure in announcing .... 

65. In signatures, the position or title added after the 
name. If this consists of only one word, it is run into 
the same line with the name; if of more than one, 
but no longer than the name, center the first letter 
under the name line, and indent one em on the 
right; if longer than the name, center the name over 



30 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

the second line and set this flush. These rules are, 
however, subject to the exigencies of special cases: 

ARTHUR P. MAGUIRE, Secretary 
Yours very truly, 

CARTER H. HARRISON 

Mayor of Chicago 

CHARLES M. GAYLEY 
Professor of English Language and Literature 

66. a), b), c), etc., used to indicate subdivisions (single 
parenthesis if beginning a paragraph, double paren- 
theses if "run in"); and a, 6, c, etc., affixed to the 
number of verse, page, etc., to denote fractional part: 
Luke 4:310. 

67. Letters used to designate unknown quantities, lines, 
etc., in algebraic, geometrical, and similar matter: 
ac+bc=c(a+b); the lines ad and A D; the nth power. 

68. As a rule, letters in legends or in the text referring 
to corresponding letters in accompanying illustra- 
tions whether or not they are in italics on the 
illustration : 

"At the point A above (see diagram)." 

69. References to particular letters: 
the letter u, a small v, a capital S. 

But do not italicize a letter used in the place of a 
name in hypothetical statements or in cases where 



MANUAL OF STYLE: ITALICS 31 

only the initial is used with a dash or as a simple 
abbreviation : 

"A bought land from B without registration of title"; 

"The news was brought at once to General M "; "Mr. 

G. was not at home when we called." 

70. s. and<f. (= shillings and pence) following numerals: 
3*. 6d. (See 270.) 

71. In zoological, geological, and paleontological mat- 
ter, scientific (Latin) names of genera and species 
when used together, the generic name being in the 
nominative singular : 

Felis leo, Rosa Carolina, Conodectes favosus, Phyteuma 
Halleri. (See 46, 48.) 

In botanical, geological, and paleontological matter, 
the names of genera and species when used together, 
and of genera, only, when used alone: 
Acer saccharum, Basidiobolus, Alternaria, Erythrosuchits. 
In medical matter, however, the general practice 
is to print such names in roman, avoiding italics 
altogether. 

In astronomical and astrophysical matter : 
a) The lower-case letters designating certain 
Fraunhof er lines : 
a, b, g, h. 

6) The lower-case letters used by Baeyer to desig- 
nate certain stars in constellations for which the 
Greek letters have been exhausted: 
f Tauri, u Herculis. 



32 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

c) When initials are used to express the titles of 
catalogues, as such, and not to designate a 
particular celestial object, such initials are to be 
italicized (see 48, 60) : 
B.D.,N.G.C. 

d} Symbols for the chemical elements: 
H, Ca, Ti. 

In accordance with the best modern practice, 
italics should no longer be used for: 

a) The capital letters given by Fraunhofer to 
spectral lines : 
A-H, and K. 

6) The letters designating the spectral types of 

stars : 

AS, 64, Mb. 

c) The capital letter H with different Greek letters, 
used to designate the various lines of hydrogen: 
Ha, H/?, etc. 

72. In resolutions, italicize the word "Resolved." (See 
39-) 

73. After headlines or titles, as a rule, the word "Con- 
tinued" ; and "To be continued" at the end of articles 
(see 179) : 

THE SCOPE OF SOCIOLOGY Continued 
[To be continued] 



MANUAL OF STYLE: QUOTATIONS 33 



QUOTATIONS 1 

PUT BETWEEN QUOTATION MARKS (and in roman type 
i.e., "roman-quote") 1 

74. Citations, run into the text, of a passage from an 
author in his own words (see 85). 

75. Quotations from different authors, or from different 
works by the same author, following each other, 
uninterrupted by any intervening original matter, or 
by any reference to their respective sources (other 
than a reference figure for a footnote), even though 
such quotations are reduced (see 85-87) . 

76. A word or phrase accompanied by its definition: 
"Drop-folio" means a page-number at the foot of the page. 

77. An unusual, technical, ironical, etc., word or phrase 
in the text, whether or not accompanied by a word, 
like "so-called," directing attention to it: 

Her "five o' clocks" were famous in the neighborhood; She 
was wearing a gown of "lobster-colored" silk; He was elected 
"master of the rolls"; We then repaired to what he called 
his "quarter deck"; A "lead" is then inserted between the 
lines; This so-called "man of affairs." 

78. In translations, the English equivalent of a word, 
phrase, or passage from a foreign language : 
Weltanschauung, "world- view" or "fundamental aspect of 
life"; Mommsen, Rimische Geschichte ("History of Rome"). 

l ln French small angle marks are used for quotation marks; in German two 
primes on one type body are used. 



34 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

79. The particular or unusual word or words to which 
attention is directed : 

the term "lynch law"; the phrase "liberty of conscience"; 
the concepts "good" and "bad"; the name "Chicago." 

But not in matter discussing terms or words where 

the meaning is clear: 

The definition of the word God. 

80. Titles of book series: 

"English Men of Letters Series"; "International Critical 
Commentary"; the series "Handbooks of Ethics and 
Religion." 

81. Titles of shorter poems (see 60): 
Shelley's "To a Skylark." 

82. Cited titles of subdivisions (e.g., parts, books, chap- 
ters, etc.) of publications; titles of papers, lectures, 
sermons, articles, toasts, mottoes, etc.: 

The Beginnings of the Science of Political Economy, Vol. I, 
"The British School," chap, ii, "John Stuart Mill"; the 
articles "Cross," "Crucifixion," and "Crusade" in Hast- 
ings' Dictionary of the Bible; The subject of the lecture was 
"Japan Its Past, Present, and Future"; the next toast on 
the program was "Our Canadian Visitor"; The king's 
motto is "For God and My Country." 

NOTE. The Botanical Gazette, in footnotes, does not use 
quotation marks for such titles. 

References to the Preface, Introduction, Table of 
Contents, Index, etc., of a specific work, should be 
set with capitals, without quotation marks: 

Preface, p. iii; "The Introduction contains ...."; "The 
Appendix occupies a hundred pages"; but: "The book has 
a very complete index." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: QUOTATIONS 35 

83. Names of ships: 

the U.S. SS." Oregon." 

84. Titles of pictures and works of art: 
Murillo's "The Holy Family." 

SET IN SMALLER TYPE 

85. Ordinarily, all prose extracts which will make five 
or more lines in the smaller type, and all poetry 
citations of two lines or more. An isolated prose 
quotation may properly be run into the text if it 
bears an organic relation to the argument presented. 
But a quotation of one or two lines which is closely 
preceded or followed by longer extracts in smaller type 
may be reduced as a matter of uniform appearance. 

86. As a rule, reduce from n pt. and 10 pt. to 9 pt., 
from 9 pt. to 8 pt., from 8 pt. to 6 pt. (see 252). 

87. Reduced citations should not have quotation marks, 
except in such cases as noted in 75; nor should 
quotation marks, as a rule, be used in connection 
with italics. 

GENERAL RULES 

88. Quotation marks should always include ellipses, and 
the phrase "etc." when it otherwise would not be 
clear that it stands for an omitted part of the matter 
quoted, perfect clearness in each individual case 
being the best criterion: 

"Art. II, sec. 2, of the Constitution provides that 'each state 
shall appoint .... a number of electors equal to the whole 
number of senators and representatives . . . .'"; "He also 



36 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

wrote a series of 'Helps to Discovery, etc.'" "etc." here 
indicating, not that he wrote other works which are unnamed, 
but that the title of the one named is not given in full; but, 
on the other hand: "Preaching from the text, 'For God so 

loved the world,' etc " "etc." here being placed 

outside of the quotation marks in order to show that it does 
not stand for other, unnamed, objects of God's love. 

89. Quoted prose matter (i.e., matter set with quotation 
marks; see above) which is broken up into para- 
graphs should have the quotation marks repeated 
at the beginning of each paragraph. 

90. Where alignment is desired, the quotation marks 
should be "cleared" i.e., should project beyond 
the line of alignment: 

"Keep away from dirtiness keep away from mess. 
Don't get into doin' things rather-more-or-less ! " 

91. Double quotation marks are used for primary quota- 
tions; for a quotation within a quotation, single; 
going back to double for a third, to single for a 
fourth, and so on: 

"Let me quote from Rossetti's Life of Keats" he said. 
"Mr. Rossetti writes as follows: 

"'To one of these phrases a few words of comment may 
be given. That axiom which concludes the "Ode on a 
Grecian Urn" 

'""Beauty is truth, truth beauty that is all 

Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know," 
is perhaps the most important contribution to thought 
which the poetry of Keats contains: it pairs with and 
transcends 

"'"A thing of beauty is a joy forever."' 

"And now I shall conclude my first point," he continued, 
"by remarking that . . . ." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 37 



SPELLING 
SPELL OUT 

92. All religious, civil, and military titles of honor and 
respect, and forms of address, preceding the name, 
except Mr., Messrs., Mrs. (French: M., MM., 
Mme, Mile), Dr., Rev., Hon., St. (do not, except 
in quotations and in correspondence, set the Rev., 
the Hon.); Esq., following the name, should like- 
wise always be abbreviated. 

93. Christian names, as George, Charles, John (not: 
Geo., Chas., Jno.), except where the abbreviated 
form is used in quoted matter or in original signa- 
tures; and "von" as part of a person's name (see 
240) ; references in text (not parenthetical or foot- 
note citations) to chapters, pages, lines, figures, 
etc. (See 69.) 

94. Subject to the exceptions named at the end of this 
section, in ordinary reading-matter, all numbers of 
less than three digits, unless of a statistical or 
technical character, or unless occurring in groups 
of six or more following each other in close succes- 
sion. (See 2736.) 

"There are thirty -eight cities in the United States with a 
population of 100,000 or over"; "a fifty-yard dash"; "two 
pounds of sugar"; "Four horses, sixteen cows, seventy-six 
sheep, and a billy goat constituted the live stock of the farm"; 
"He spent a total of two years, three months, and seventeen 



38 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

days in jail." But: "He spent 128 days in the hospital"; 
"a board 20 feet 2 inches long by i$ feet wide and ij inches 
thick"; "the ratio of 16 to i"; "In some quarters of Paris, 
inhabited by wealthy families, the death-rate is i to every 65 
persons; in others, inhabited by the poor, it is i to 15"; "His 
purchase consisted of 2 pounds of sugar, 20 pounds of flour, 
i pound of coffee, \ pound of tea, 3 pounds of meat, and 
ij pounds of fish, besides 2 pecks of potatoes and a pint of 
vinegar." 

Treat all numbers in connected groups alike, as far 
as possible; do not use figures for some and spell out 
others; if the largest contains three or more digits, 
use figures for all (see 96) : 

"The force employed during the three months was 87, 93, 
and 106, respectively." 

As a general rule, however, decimals, degrees, 
dimensions, distances, enumerations, money, per- 
centage, weights, and like matter should be 
expressed in figures: 

10, 45 miles, 3 cubic feet, 24 pages, 100 bushels, 9 per cent 
(see 123), 45 pounds, $1,000, etc. 

95. Round numbers (i.e., approximate figures in even 
units, the unit being 100 in numbers of less than 
1,000, and 1,000 in numbers of more) : 

"The attendance was estimated at five hundred" (but: "at 
550"); "a thesis of about three thousand words" (but: "of 
about 2,700"); "The population of Chicago is approximately 
three millions" (but: "2,900,000"). Cases like 1,500, if for 
some special reason spelled out, should be written "fifteen 
hundred," not "one thousand five hundred." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 39 

96. All numbers, no matter how high, and all terms of 
measurement or number otherwise abbreviated, 
commencing a sentence in ordinary reading-matter: 
"Five hundred and ninety-three men, 417 women, and 126 
children under eighteen, besides 63 of the crew, went down 
with the ship"; "Figure 3 shows the comparative difference 
in prices." 

When this is impracticable, or for any reason unde- 
sirable, reconstruct the sentence; e.g.: 
"The total number of those who went down with the ship 
was 593 men," etc. 

97. Sums of money, when occurring in isolated cases in 
ordinary reading-matter : 

"The admission was two dollars." 
When several such numbers occur close together, and 
in all matter of a statistical character, use figures: 
"Admission: men, $2; women, $i; children, 25 cents." 

98. Time of day, in ordinary reading-matter: 

at four; at half-past two in the afternoon; at seven o'clock. 
Statistically, in enumerations, and always in connec- 
tion with A.M. and P.M., use figures: 
at 4: 15 P.M. (omit "o'clock" in such connections). 

99. Ages: 

eighty years and four months old; children between six and 
fourteen. 

100. Numbers of centuries, of Egyptian dynasties, of 
sessions of Congress, of military bodies, of political 
divisions, of thoroughfares, and in all similar cases, 
unless brevity is an important consideration (see 
7, 8, and 13) : 



40 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

nineteenth century; Fifth Dynasty; Fifty-fourth Congress, 
second session; Fifteenth Infantry I.N.G.; Sixth Con- 
gressional District, Second Ward; Fifth Avenue. 

101. References to particular decades: 
in the nineties (see 165). 

102. Names of months, except in statistical matter or in 
long enumerations: 

from January i to April 15 (omit, after dates, st, d, and th). 

103. "United States," except in quotations and such con- 
nections as: General Schofield, U.S.A.; U.S. SS. 
" Oregon"; in footnotes and similar references: U.S. 
Geological Survey (see 22, 52, 106). 

104. "Railroad (-way)," and "Fort," "Mount," and 
"Port" in geographical appellations (see 4): 

Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railroad (not: R.R. orRy.); 
Fort Wayne, Mount Elias, Port Huron. 

105. In most cases, all names of publications. This rule, 
like many another, is open to modification in particu- 
lar instances, for expediency, nature of context, 
authoritative usage, and author's preference. Gen- 
erally, if in doubt, spell out; good taste will 
condone offenses in this direction more readily than 
in the opposite. 

ABBREVIATE 

106. Names of states, territories, and possessions of the 
United States following those of towns, as follows, 
without space between the letters of abbrevia- 
tions (see 22, 52, 103), when mentioned in lists, 
signatures, bibliographical matter, etc., but not 
ordinarily in text-matter: 



MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 41 



Ala. 


Iowa 


Neb. 


Samoa 


Alaska 


Kan. 


Nev. 


S.C. 


Ariz. 


Ky. 


N.H. 


S.D. 


Ark. 


La. 


NJ. 


Tenn. 


Cal. 


Me. 


N.M. 


Tex. 


Colo. 


Mass. 


N.Y. 


T.H. = Territory 


Conn. 


Md. 


Ohio 


of Hawaii 


B.C. 


Mich. 


Okla. 


Utah 


Del. 


Minn. 


Ore. 


Vt. 


Fla. 


Miss. 


Pa. 


Va. 


Ga. 


Mo. 


P.I. = Philippine 


Wash. 


Idaho 


Mont. 


Islands 


Wis. 


111. 


N.C. 


P.R. = Porto Rico W.Va. 


Ind. 


N.D. 


R.I. 


Wyo. 



107. In technical matter (footnote references, bibliogra- 
phies, etc.), "Company" and "Brothers," and the 
word "and" (& =" short and" or "ampersand"), in 
names of commercial firms: 

The Macmillan Co., Macmillan & Co., Harper Bros.; 
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railroad. 

In text-matter, not of a technical character, " Com- 
pany " and " Brothers" may, however, be spelled out: 

"Harper Brothers have recently published . . . ."; "The 
Century Company announces . . . ."; "The extraordinary 
story of the South Sea Company." 

And when the name of a commercial concern does 
not consist of proper names, the "and" should be 
spelled out: 

American Steel and Wire Co. 

108. "Saint" or "Saints" before a name: 

St. Louis, St. Peter's Church, SS. Peter and Paul. 



109. 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

"St." should, however, be omitted in connection 
with names of apostles, evangelists, church fathers: 
Luke, Paul, Augustine; not: St. Luke, St. Paul, etc. 

In exact references 1 to Scripture passages (134, 173), 
the books of the Bible and of the Apocrypha, 
the Apocalyptic, and versions of the Bible: 

OLD TESTAMENT 



Gen. 
Exod. 
Lev. 
Num. 
Deut 
Josh. 
Judg. 
Ruth 
I and II Sam. 
I and II Kings 

Matt. 
Mark 
Luke 
John 
Acts 
Rom. 
I and II Cor. 

I and II Esd. 
Tob.=Tobit 
Jth.= Judith 
Rest of Esther 

En. 
Sib. Or. 


I and II Chron. Isa. Jonah 
Ezra Jer. Mic. 
Neh. Lam. Nah. 
Esther Ezek. Hab. 
Job Dan. Zeph. 
Ps. (Pss.) Hos. Hag. 
Prov. Joel Zech. 
Eccles. Amos Mai. 
Song of Sol. (or Obad. 
Cant.) 

NEW TESTAMENT 

Gal. Philem. 
Eph. Heb. 
Phil. Jas. 
Col. I and II Pet. 
I and II Thess. I, II, and III John 
I and II Tim. Jude 
Titus Rev. 

APOCRYPHA (APOC.) 

Wisd. of Sol. Sus. 
Ecclus. Bel and Dragon 
Bar. Pr. of Man. 
Song of Three I, II, III, and IV 
Children Mace. 

APOCALYPTIC 

Asmp. M. Ps. Sol. Bk. Jub. 
Apoc. Bar. XII P. Asc. Isa. 



1 But in text matter do not abbreviate references to whole books or chapters 
: 'The story is presented in Revelation, chapter 10." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 43 

VERSIONS OF THE BIBLE COMMONLY REFERRED TO 

A.V. = Authorized Version. 

R.V. = Revised Version. 

R.V.m. = Revised Version, margin. 

A. R.V. = American Standard Revised Version. 

A.R.V.m. = American Standard Revised Version, margin. 

E.R.V. = English Revised Version. 

E.R.V.m. = English Revised Version, margin. 

E.V. = English Version(s) of the Bible. 

Vulg. = Vulgate. 

LXX = Septuagint. 

MT =Masoretic text 

no. In parenthetical literary references, in footnotes, 
and in matter of a bibliographical character, "vol- 
ume," "number," "psalm," "division," "chapter," 
"article," "section," "page," "column," "verse," 
"line," "note," "figure," followed by their number 
(see 37, 96, and 237); and the word "following" 
after the number to denote continuance: 

Vol. I (plural, Vols.), No. i (Nos.), Ps. 20 (Pss.), Div. Ill, 
chap, ii (chaps.), art. iii (arts.), sec. 4 (sees.), p. 5 (pp.), 
col. 6 (cols.), vs. 7 (vss.), 1. 8 (11.), n. 9 (nn.), Fig. 7 (Figs.); 
PP- S~7 (= pages 5 to 7 inclusive), pp. $f. (=page 5 and the 
following page), pp. sff. (=page 5 and the following 
pages) ; ed (d) . ( = edition[s]) . 

in. The common designations of weights and measures 
in the metric system, as well as the symbols of meas- 
urement in common use, when following a numeral: 

i m., 2 dm., 3 cm., 4 mm.; c.m. (=cubic meter), c.d., c.c., 
c.mm.; sq. mi. ( = square mile); gm. ( = gram); gr. 
( = grain); h. ( = hour), min. ( = minute), sec. (= second); 
Ib. ( = pound), oz. ( = ounce); yd., ft., in.; kg. (=kilogram), 
kw. ( = kilowatt); mg. ( = milligram) ; mag. ( = magnitude), 
A ( = angstrom units), h.p. (= horse-power), C. (= Centi- 
grade), F. (= Fahrenheit), etc. (See 123.) 



44 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



The following is a list of the standard abbreviations for 
technical values, recommended by the American Insti- 
tute of Electrical Engineers: 



alternating current . 

brake horse-power . 
boiler horse-power . 
British thermal units 
candle-power 
centimeters . 
circular mils . 
counter electromotive 



a-c. (when used as a compound 
adjective; otherwise spell out) 
b.h.p. 
boiler h.p. 
B.t.u. 
c-p. 
cm. 
cir. mils 



force 


counter e.m.f. 




cubic 


cu. 




direct current 


d-c. (when used as 


a compound 


adjective; otherwise spell out) 


electric horse-power 


e.h.p. 




electromotive force . 


e.m.f. 




feet 


ft. 




foot-pounds .... 


ft-lb. 




gallons 


gal. 




grains 


gr- 




grams 


g. or gm. 




gram-calories 


g-cal. 




hours 


hr. 




inches 


in. 




indicated horse-power . 


i.h.p. 




kilograms .... 


kg. 




kilogram-meters 


kg-m. 




kilogram-calories 


kg-cal. 




kilometers .... 


km. 




kilowatts 


kw. 




kilowatt-hours . 


kw-hr. 




magnetomotive force 


m.m.f. 




miles per hour (second) . 


m.p.hr. (sec.) 




millimeters .... 


mm. 




milligrams .... 


mg. 




minutes 


min. 




meters 


m. 




meter-kilograms 


m-kg. 





MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 45 

pounds Ib. (not Ibs.) 

revolutions per minute . rev. per min., or r.p.m. 

seconds sec. 

square sq. 

square-root-of-mean- 

square effective, or r.m.s. 

kilovolts kv. 

kilovolt-amperes . . kv-a. 

watt-hours .... watt-hr.. 

watts per candle-power watts per c-p. 

yards yd. 

NOTE. In the case of hyphenated abbreviations, the first ele- 
ment of the compound does not take a period. 

GENERAL RULES 

112. In extracts from modern authors whose spelling and 
punctuation differ but slightly from ours, and where 
such variations do not affect the meaning, use office 
style. In citations from Old English works, and 
in cases where it appears to be essential to the 
writer's plan or the requirements of the context to 
give a faithful rendering, follow the original copy. 
Titles should always be accurately quoted. 

113. Form the possessive of proper names ending in s or 
another sibilant, if monosyllabic, by adding an 
apostrophe and s; if of more than one syllable, by 
adding an apostrophe only, except names ending 
in -ce (see 165) : 

King James's Version, Burns's poems, Marx's theories; 
Moses' law, Jesus' birth, Demosthenes' orations, Berlioz' 
compositions; Horace's odes. 

But in the case of proper names ending in a silent 
sibilant the possessive is formed by the addition 



46 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

of the apostrophe and s, whether the word is 

monosyllabic or not: 

Charlevoix's discoveries, Des Moines's population. 

114. Before sounded h, long u (or eu), and the words 
"one," "once," use "a" as the form of the indefinite 
article: 

a hotel, a harmonic rendition, a historical work, a union, 
a euphonious word, such a one. 

115. The ligatures & and ce are not used at the present 
day, either in Latin and Greek words, or in words 
adopted into English from these languages. In 
English these words are written either with ae, oe, 
separately, or with e alone. The ligature is re- 
tained, however, in Old English and in French: 

aetas; Oedipus Tyrannus; aesthetic; (but: ceuvre, 
French); but: maneuver; Alfred (Alfred in English). 

116. Differentiate "farther" and "further" by using the 
former in the sense of "more remote," "at a greater 
distance" (with verbs of action); the latter in the 
sense of "moreover," "in addition": 

the farther end; he went still farther; further, he suggested; a 
further reason. 

117. In forms of address (vocative) use the "O" without 
a comma following; for an exclamation use "Oh," 
followed by a comma or an exclamation point 
(see 40) : 

"O thou most mighty ruler!" "Oh, why did not Cerberus 
drag me back to hell ?" 



MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 



47 



1 1 8. The following participles retain the final e in the 
primary word: 

agreeing hieing singeing 

dyeing hoeing tingeing 

eyeing shoeing vicing 

The following participles illustrate those that omit 
the e before the terminal : 



abridging 
acknowledging 
aging 


encouraging judging 
filing mistaking 
firing moving 


arguing 


glazing 


organizing 


awing 


gluing 


owing 




biting 


grudging 


trudging 


bluing 


icing 


truing 




changing 


issuing 






1 19. Spell: 








abridgment 


aye 


clamor 


dulness 


accouter 


backward 


clinch 


dwelt 


acknowledgment 


bark (vessel) 


clue 


embitter 


adz 


barreled 


coeval 


emir 


aegis 


bazaar 


color 


employee 


Aeolian 


Beduin 


controller 


encyclopedic 


aeroplane 


behavior 


cotillion 


endeavor 


aesthetic 


biased 


councilor 


enfold 


afterward 


blessed 


counselor 


engulf 


almanac 


bowlder 


cozy 


enrol 


ambassador 


burned 


cue 


ensnare 


amid 


caesura 


defense 


envelope (n.) 


among 


caliber 


demarcation 


enwrapped 


anemia 


canceled 


demeanor 


equaled 


appareled 


candor 


descendant (n.) 


Eskimo 


appendixes 


cannoneer 


diarrhea 


esophagus 


(of book) 


canyon 


dieresis 


exhibitor 


arbor 


carcass 


disheveled 


fantasy 


archaeology 


caroled 


disk 


favor 


ardor 


castor (roller) 


dispatch 


fetish 


armor 


caviler 


distil 


fetus 


ascendancy 


center 


downward 


fiber 


ascendent 


check 


draft 


flavor 


Athenaeum 


chiseled 


drought 


fluorid 


ax 


chock-full 


dueler 


focused 



4 8 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



forward intrench 

fulfil (fulfilled) intrust 

fulness inward 

gaiety jeweled 

Galilean Judea 

gild (to cover judgment 

with gold) katabolism 

gipsy kidnaper (but 
glamor (kidnapped) 

glycerin Koran 

goodbye labeled 

graveled labor 

gray lacquer 

Graeco-Roman leukocyte 

gruesome leveled 

guarantee (v.) libeled 

guaranty (n.) liter 

guild (an organi- loath 

zation) lodgment 

hamartiology Lukan 

harbor maneuver 

hematoxylin Markan 

hemorrhage marshaled 

Hindu marvelous 

honor meager 

imbed medieval 

impaneled meter 

imperiled miter 

incase modeled 

inclose Mohammedan 

incrust mold 

incumbrance molt 

indexes (of book) moneyed 

indices (mathe- moneys 

matical only) movable 

indorse mustache 

ingraft nearby (adj.) 

instal (installed) neighbor 



instil (instilled) 
insure 



niter 
odor 



offense 

one's self 

outward 

oxid 

paean 

paleography 

paleontology 

Paleozoic 

paneled 

paraffin 

parceled 

parole 

parquet 

partisan 

peddler 

penciled 

Phoenix 

pigmy 

plow 

practice 

(n. and v.) 
pretense 
primeval 
program 
quarreled 
quartet 
raveled 
reconnoiter 
refill 
reinforce 
rencounter 
reverie 
rhyme 
rigor 
rivaled 
riveted 
ruble 
rumor 
saber 
salable 



Savior 

savor 

scepter 

sepulcher 

skepticism 

skilful 

smolder 

specter 

staunch 

steadfast 

subtle 

succor j 

sumac , 

syrup 

taboo 

talc 

technique 1 

theater 

thraldom 

thrash 

timbre (of 

music) 
today 
tormentor 
toward 
trammeled 
tranquilize 
tranquillity 
traveler 
trousers 
truncated 
upward 
vapor 
vendor 
vigor 
whiskey 
wilful 
woeful 
woolen 



worshiper 

NOTE. Make one word of "anyone," "everyone," "today," 
"tomorrow," "tonight," "cannot" (see 204). Distinguish 
between "sometimes" and "some time(s)," "someone" 
and "some one (or more) of the number." Use the form 
"someone else's." 

1 In medical work more generally spelled "technic." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: SPELLING 



49 



120. Differentiate between the terminations -ise and -ize 
as follows: 



SPELL WITH -IS6 



advertise 


compromise 


excise 


premise 


advise 


demise 


exercise 


reprise 


affranchise 


despise 


exorcise 


revise 


apprise (to 


devise 


franchise 


rise 


inform) 


disfranchise 


improvise 


supervise 


arise 


disguise 


incise 


surmise 


chastise 


emprise 


manuprise 


surprise 


circumcise 


enfranchise 


merchandise 




comprise 


enterprise 






SPELL WITH -ize (-yze) 


aggrandize 


dramatize 


mercerize 


revolutionize 


agonize 


economize 


mesmerize 


satirize 


analyze 


emphasize 


metamorphize 


scandalize 


anatomize 


energize 


methodize 


scrutinize 


anglicize 


epitomize 


minimize 


signalize 


apologize 


equalize 


modernize 


solemnize 


apostrophize 


eulogize 


monopolize 


soliloquize 


apprize (to 


evangelize 


moralize 


specialize 


appraise) 


extemporize 


nationalize 


spiritualize 


authorize 


familiarize 


naturalize 


standardize 


autolyze 


fertilize 


neutralize 


stigmatize 


baptize 


fossilize 


organize 


subsidize 


brutalize 


fraternize 


ostracize 


summarize 


canonize 


galvanize 


oxidize 


syllogize 


catechize 


generalize 


paralyze 


symbolize 


catholicize 


gormandize 


particularize 


sympathize 


cauterize 


harmonize 


pasteurize 


tantalize 


centralize 


hellenize 


patronize 


temporize 


characterize 


humanize 


philosophize 


tranquilize 


Christianize 


immortalize 


plagiarize 


tyrannize 


civilize 


italicize 


polarize 


utilize 


classicize 


jeopardize 


professionalize 


vaporize 


colonize 


legalize 


protestantize 


visualize 


criticize 


liberalize 


pulverize 


vitalize 


crystallize 


localize 


realize 


vocalize 


demoralize 


magnetize 


recognize 


vulcanize 


deputize 


manumize 


reorganize 


vulgarize 


dogmatize 


memorialize 







50 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



PUNCTUATION 

121. All punctuation marks should be printed in the same 
style or font of type as the word, letter, or character 
immediately preceding them: 

"With the cry of Banzai! the regiment stormed the hill", 
Luke 4:160; paragraph 2 (a); Botanical Gazette 20:144. 

PERIOD 

122. A period is used to indicate the end of a declarative 
sentence (see 125). 

123. a) Put a period after abbreviations: 

Macmillan & Co., Mr. Smith, St. Paul, No. i, Chas. (see 
93), ibid., s.v., ip mm., 1201 E. Main St., SE. J of SW. J, 
T. 3 N., R. 69 W., Sec. n, middle of S. line, N.NE. (north 
by northeast) . 

V) Do not use a period after contractions cases 
where a mechanical necessity compels the omission 
of a letter or letters in the middle of a word for which 
there is no recognized abbreviated form; such omis- 
sion is indicated by an apostrophe: 
m'f 'g pl't ( = manufacturing plant) ; 't isn't. 
c) Treat the metric symbols as abbreviations, but 
not the chemical symbols, nor the phrase "per 
cent," nor the format of books: 
O, Fe; 2 per cent (see 94); 4to, 8vo. 

NOTE. With respect to symbols for measures the following 
exceptions should be noted: Astrophysical Journal, 12 mm (with 
thin space and no period) (but: 2 h 3 m 4 s ); Botanical Gazette, 
i2mm., i25ft.,9cc. (on line, with period). 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 51 

But do not use a period, in technical matter, after the 
recognized abbreviations for linguistic epochs, or 
for titles of well-known publications of which the 
initials only are given, nor after MS (= manuscript), 
nor after Mme and Mile in French (see 92) : 
IE (=Indo-European), OE (= Old English), MHG (=Middle 
High German); AJSL (= American Journal of Semitic 
Languages and Literatures), ZAW (=Zeitschrijt filr alttesta- 
mentliche Wissenschaff), CIL (= Cor pus Inscriptionum Lati- 
norum), PMLA (= Publications of the Modern Language 
Association}. 

124. Use no period after Roman numerals, even if having 
the value of ordinals: 

Vol. IV; Louis XVI was on the throne. 

125. Omit the period after running-heads (for explanation 
of this and the following terms see 279-83); after 
centered headlines; after side-heads set in separate 
lines; after cut-in heads; after box-heads in tables; 
and after superscriptions and legends which do not 
form a complete sentence (with subject and predi- 
cate), or which do not make more than a single line 
of type; after date lines at top of communications, 
and after signatures (see 50) . 

126. The period is always placed inside the quotation 
marks; and inside the parentheses when the matter 
inclosed is an independent sentence and forms no 
part of the preceding sentence; otherwise outside: 

Tennyson's "In Memoriam." Put the period inside the 
quotation marks. (This is a rule without exception.) When 
tie parentheses form part of the preceding sentence, put 
the period outside (as, for instance, here). 



52 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

EXCLAMATION POINT 

127. The exclamation point is used to mark an outcry, or 
an emphatic or ironical utterance: 

"Long live the king!" "Heaven forbid!" "Good!" he 
cried; "How funny this seems!" "This must not be!" The 
subject of his lecture was "The Thisness of the That"! The 
speaker went on: "Nobody should leave his home tomorrow 
without a marked ballot in their (!) pocket." 

128. The exclamation point is placed inside the quotation 

marks or parentheses when part of the quotation 
or parenthetical matter; otherwise outside. 
See illustrations in 127. 

INTERROGATION POINT 

129. The interrogation point is used to mark a query, or 
to express a doubt: 

"Who is this ?" The prisoner gave his name as Roger Crown- 
inshield, the son of an English baronet ( ?). Can the Bible 
be applied to children ? is a question involved. 

In Spanish the question mark is expressed before 
as well as after the question, but the mark that 
precedes is inverted. 

Indirect questions should not be followed by an 
interrogation point: 
She asked whether he was ill. 

A technically interrogative sentence disguised as 
a question out of courtesy but actually embody- 
ing a request does not need the interrogation 
point: 
Will you kindly sign and return the inclosed card. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 53 

130. The interrogation point should be placed inside the 
quotation marks or parentheses only when it is a 
part of the quotation or parenthetical matter: 

"Take hold, my son, of the toughest knots in life and try 
to untie them; try to be worthy of man's highest estate; 
have high, noble, manly honor. There is but one test of 
everything, and that is, Is it right?" (Henry A. Wise). 
The question: "Who is who, and what is what?" Were 
you ever in "Tsintsinnati" ? 

COLON 

131. The colon is used to "mark a discontinuity of 
grammatical construction greater than that indicated 
by the semicolon and less than that indicated by the 
period. It is commonly used (i) to emphasize a 
close connection in thought between two clauses 
each of which forms a complete sentence, and which 
might with grammatical propriety be separated by 
a period; (2) to separate a clause which is gram- 
matically complete from a second which contains 
an illustration or amplification of its meaning; (3) 
to introduce a formal statement, an extract, a speech 
in a dialogue, etc." (Century Dictionary] (unless 
this is preceded by a conjunction, like "that," 
immediately connecting it with what goes before). 
Before the quotation of a clause in the middle of a 
sentence use a comma: 

(i) "This argument undeniably contains some force: Thus 
it is well known that . . ." "The secretion of the gland 



54 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

goes on uninterruptedly: this may account for the condition 
of the organ." "The fear of death is universal: even the 
lowest animals instinctively shrink from annihilation." (2) 
"Most countries have a national flower: France the lily, 
England the rose, etc." "Lambert pine: the gigantic sugar 
pine of California." (3) "The rule may be stated thus: 
. . . ." "We quote from the address: . . . ." "Charles: 
'Where are you going?' George: 'To the mill-pond.'" 
But: "He stoutly maintained that 'the letter is a monstrous 
forgery'"; and: "Declaring, 'The letter is a monstrous 
forgery,' he tried to wash his hands of the whole affair." 

132. The colon thus often takes the place of an implied 
"namely," "as follows," "for instance," or a similar 
phrase. Where such word or phrase is used, it 
should be followed by a colon if what follows consists 
of one or more grammatically complete clauses 
(see 36) ; otherwise by a comma (see 145) : 

"This is true of only two nations the wealthiest, though not 
the largest, in Europe: Great Britain and France"; but: 
"This is true of only two nations the wealthiest, though 
not the largest, in Europe viz., Great Britain and France." 
"He made several absurd statements. For example: ...."; 
but: "There are several states in the Union for instance, 
Kansas and Wyoming which . . . ." 

133. Put a colon after the salutatory phrase at the begin- 
ning of a letter and after the introductory remark 
of a speaker addressing the chairman or the audi- 
ence: 

MY DEAR MR. BROWN: (See 50.) 

Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen: (See 64.) 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 55 

134. Put a centered (g-unit) colon between chapter and 
verse in Scripture passages, between hours and 
minutes in time indications, and between volume 
and page reference when such style is used: 
Matt. 2:5-13; 4:30 P.M.; Botanical Gazette 20:144. 

135. Put a colon between the place of publication and the 
publisher's name in literary and bibliographical 
references : 

Clement of Alexandria (London: Macmillan), II, 97. 

136. The colon should be placed outside the quotation 
marks, unless a part of the quotation: 

He writes under the head of "Notes and Comments": 
" Many a man can testify to the truth of the old adage :" etc. 

SEMICOLON 

137. A semicolon is used to mark the division of a 
sentence somewhat more independent than that 
marked by a comma, or to separate complete 
statements the argument of which is dependent 
upon their remaining in the same sentence: 

"Are we giving our lives to perpetuate the things that the 
past has created for its needs, forgetting to ask whether these 
things still serve today's needs; or are we thinking of living 
men ?" "This is as important for science as it is for practice; 
indeed, it may be said to be the only important consideration." 
"It is so in war; it is so in the economic life; it cannot be 
otherwise in religion." "In Persia the final decision rests with 
the Shah, advised by his ministers; in most constitutional 
countries, indirectly with the people as represented in parlia- 
ment; in Switzerland alone, through the referendum, directly 
with the electorate at large.'' "This, let it be remembered, 



56 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

was the ground taken by Mill; for to him 'utilitarianism,' 
in spite of all his critics may say, did not mean the pursuit of 
bodily pleasure." ("For" in such cases should commonly be 
preceded by a semicolon.) 

138. In enumerations use a semicolon between the differ- 
ent links, if these consist of more than a few words 
closely connected, and especially if individual clauses 
contain any punctuation mark of less value than a 
period, or an exclamation or interrogation point 
(unless inclosed in parentheses), yet are intimately 
joined one with the other, and all with the sentence 
or clause leading up to them, for instance through 
dependence upon a conjunction, like "that," pre- 
ceding them (see 36) : 

"The membership of the international commission was made 
up as follows: France, 4; Germany, 5; Great Britain, i 
(owing to a misunderstanding, the announcement did not 
reach the English societies in time to secure a full quota from 
that country. Sir Henry Campbell, who had the matter in 
charge, being absent at the time, great difficulty was experi- 
enced in arousing sufficient interest to insure the sending of 
even a solitary delegate); Italy, 3; the United States, 7." 
"The defendant, in justification of his act, pleaded that (i) 
he was despondent over the loss of his wife; (2) he was out 
of work; (3) he had had nothing to eat for two days; (4) he 
was under the influence of liquor." "Presidents Hadley, of 
Yale; Eliot, of Harvard; Butler, of Columbia; and Angell, 
of Michigan." 

139. In Scripture references a semicolon is used to 
separate passages containing chapters: 

Gen. 2:3-6, 9, 14; 3:17; chap. 5; 6:15. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 57 

140. The semicolon should be placed outside the quota- 
tion marks or parentheses, unless a part of the 
quotation or parenthetical matter. 

COMMA 

141. The comma is "used to indicate the smallest inter- 
ruptions in continuity of thought or grammatical 
construction, the marking of which contributes to 
clearness" (Century Dictionary)'. 

"Here, as in many other cases, what is sometimes popularly 
supposed to be orthodox is really a heresy, an exaggeration, 
a distortion, a caricature of the true doctrine of the church. 
The doctrine is, indeed, laid down by an authority here and 
there; but, speaking generally, it has no place in the stand- 
ards, creeds, or confessions of the great communions; e.g., 
the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed, the canons of the early 
ecumenical councils, the Westminster Confession, the Thirty- 
nine Articles." "Shakspere and other, lesser, poets." "The 
books which I have read I herewith return" (i.e., I return 
those [only] which I have read); but: "The books, which I 
have read, I herewith return" (i.e., having read them [all], 
I now return them). "Gossiping, women are happy"; and: 
"Gossiping women are happy." "Of these four, two Ameri- 
cans and one Englishman started"; and: "Of these, four 
two Americans and two Englishmen started." "The suffer- 
ing, God will relieve." "Behind, her 'stage mother' stood 
fluttering with extra wraps." "Some boys and girls pre- 
maturely announce themselves, usually in uncomfortable, 
sometimes in bad, ways." 

142. Use a comma to separate proper nouns belonging 
to different individuals or places: 

"To John, Smith was always kind"; "To America, Europe 
awards the prize of mechanical skill." 



58 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

143. Put a comma before "and," "or," and "nor" 
connecting the last two links in a sequence of three 
or more; or all the links in a series of greater length, 
or where each individual link consists of several 
words; always put a comma before "etc.": 

Tom, Dick, and Harry; either copper, silver, or gold; "He 
was equally familiar with Homer, and Shakspere, and 
Moliere, and Cervantes, and Goethe, and Ibsen"; "Neither 
France for her art, nor Germany for her army, nor England 
for her democracy, etc." 

But do not use a comma where "and," etc., serves 
to connect all of the links in a brief and close-knit 
phrase : 

"a man good and noble and true"; "I do not remember who 
wrote the stanza whether it was Shelley or Keats or Moore." 

144. Ordinarily, put a comma before and after clauses in- 
troduced by such conjunctions as "and," "but," "or," 
"if," "while," "as" (meaning "since"), "whereas," 
"since," "because," "when," "after," "although," 
etc., especially if a change of subject takes place: 

"When he arrived at the railway station, the train had gone, 
and his friend, who had come to bid him goodbye, had 
departed, but left no word. As the next train was not due 
for two hours, he decided to take a ride about the town, 
although it offered little of interest to the sightseer. While 
he regretted his failure to meet his friend, he did not go 
to his house." 

But do not use a comma before clauses introduced 
by such conjunctions if the preceding clause is not 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 59 

logically complete without them; nor before "if," 
"but," and "though" in brief and close-welded 
phrases: 

"This is especially interesting because they represent the two 
extremes and because they present differences in their rela- 
tions"; "This is good because true"; "I shall agree to this 
only if you accept my conditions"; "I would not if I could, 
and could not if I would"; "honest though poor"; "a cheap 
but valuable book." 

145. Such conjunctions, adverbs, connective particles, or 
phrases as "now," "then," "however," "indeed," 
"therefore," "moreover," "furthermore," "never- 
theless," "though," "in fact," "in short," "for 
instance," "that is," "of course," "on the contrary," 
"on the other hand," "after all," "to be sure," 
"for example," etc., may be followed by a comma 
when standing at the beginning of a sentence or 
clause to introduce an inference or an explanation, 
and may be placed between commas when wedged 
into the middle of a sentence or clause to mark off a 
distinct break in the continuity of thought or struc- 
ture, indicating a summarizing of what precedes, 
the point of a new departure, or a modifying, restrict- 
ive, or antithetical addition, etc. : 

"Indeed, this was exactly the point of the argument"; 
"Moreover, he did not think it feasible"; "Now, the question 
is this: . . . ." "Nevertheless, he consented to the scheme"; 
"In fact, rather thi reverse is true"; "This, then, is my 
position: . . . ."; "The statement, therefore, cannot be 
verified"; "He thought, however, that he would like to 



60 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

try"; "That, after all, seemed a trivial matter"; "The 
gentleman, of course, was wrong"; "A comma may be used 
between clauses of a compound sentence that are connected 
by a simple con junction, though a comma is emphatically not 
used between clauses connected by a conjunctive adverb." 

But do not use a comma with such words when the 
connection is logically close and structurally smooth 
enough not to call for any pause in reading; with 
"therefore," "nevertheless," etc., when directly 
following the verb; with "indeed" when directly 
preceding or following an adjective or another 
adverb which it qualifies; nor ordinarily with such 
terms as "perhaps," "also," "likewise," etc.: 

"Therefore I say unto you . . . ."; "He was therefore 
unable to be present"; "It is nevertheless true"; "He is 
recovering very slowly indeed"; "He was perhaps thinking 
of the future"; "He was a scholar and a sportsman too." 

146. A comma is preferably omitted before "rather" in 
such an expression as 

"The time-value is to be measured in this way rather than 
by the time-equivalent of the strata." 

147. If among several adjectives preceding a noun the 
last bears a more direct relation to the noun than the 
others, it should not be preceded by a comma: 

"the admirable political institutions of the country"; "a hand- 
some, wealthy young man." 

148. Participial clauses, especially such as contain an 
explanation of the main clause, should usually be 
set off by a comma : 

"Being asleep, he did not hear him"; "Exhausted by a day's 
hard work, he slept like a stone." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 6 1 

149. Put a comma before "not" introducing an anti- 
thetical clause or phrase: 

"Men addict themselves to inferior pleasures, not because 
they deliberately prefer them, but because they are the only 
ones to which they have access." 

But do not use commas before such words when the 
thought is incomplete without the following words. 

150. For parenthetical, adverbial, or appositional clauses 
or phrases use commas to indicate structurally 
disconnected, but logically integral, interpolations; 
dashes to indicate both structurally and logically 
disconnected insertions ; never use the two together 
(see 175): 

"Since, from the naturalistic point of view, mental states are 
the concomitants of physiological processes . . . ."; "The 
French, generally speaking, are a nation of artists"; "The 
English, highly democratic as they are, nevertheless deem 
the nobility fundamental to their political and social systems." 
"There was a time I forget the exact date when these 
conditions were changed." 

151. Use a comma to separate two identical or closely 
similar words, even if the sense or grammatical con- 
struction does not require such separation (see 142) : 

"Whatever is, is good"; "What he was, is not known"; 
"The chief aim of academic striving ought not to be, to be 
most in evidence "; "This is unique only in this, that . . . ." 

152. In adjectival phrases a complementary, qualifying, 
delimiting, or antithetical adjective added to the 
main epithet preceding a noun should ordinarily be 
preceded and followed by a comma: 



62 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

"This harsh, though at the same time perfectly logical, 
conclusion"; "The deceased was a stern and unapproach- 
able, yet withal sympathetic and kind-hearted, gentleman " ; 
"Here comes in the most responsible, because it is the final, 
office of the teacher"; "The most sensitive, if not the most 
elusive, part of the training of children"; "The better a 
proverb is, the more trite it usually becomes." 

153. Two or more co-ordinate clauses ending in a word 
governing or modifying another word in a following 
clause should be separated by commas : 

". . . . a shallow body of water connected with, but well 
protected from, the open sea"; "He was as tall as, though 
much younger than, his brother"; "The cultivation in our- 
selves of a sensitive feeling on the subject of veracity is one of 
the most useful, and the enfeeblement of that feeling one of 
the most hurtful, things"; "This road leads away from, 
rather than toward, your destination." 

154. Similarly, use a comma to separate two numbers: 
"In 1905, 347 teachers attended the convention"; November 
i, 1905. (See 160.) 

155. A comma is employed to indicate the omission, for 
brevity or convenience, of a word or words the 
repetition of which is not essential to the meaning : 
"In Illinois there are seventeen such institutions; in Ohio, 
twenty-two; in Indiana, thirteen" ; "In Lincoln's first cabinet 
Seward was secretary of state; Chase, of the treasury; 
Cameron, of war; and Bates, attorney general." 

Often, however, such constructions are smooth enough 
not to call for commas (and consequent semicolons) : 
"One puppy may resemble the father, another the mother, 
and a third some distant ancestor." 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 63 

156. A direct quotation, maxim, or similar expression, 
when brief, should be separated from the preceding 
part of the sentence by a comma (see 131) : 

" God said, Let there be light." 

157. Use a comma before "of" in connection with resi- 
dence or position: 

Mr. and Mrs. Mclntyre, of Detroit, Mich.; President Hadley, 
of Yale University. 

Exceptions are those cases, historical and political, in 
which the place-name practically has become a part 
of the person's name, or is so closely connected with 
this as to render the separation artificial or illogical: 

Clement of Alexandria, Philip of Anjou, King Edward of 
England. 

158. In literary references insert a comma between con- 
secutive numbers to represent a break in the con- 
tinuity, a separate reference to each; an en dash, to 
represent one continuous reference between the 
consecutive numbers: 

pp. 4, 7-8, 10; Ezra 5:7-8; IV, 123-30. 

159. Put a comma after digits indicating thousands, 1 
except in a date or in a page-reference and not 
between the constituents of dimensions, weights, 
and measures: 

1,276, 10,419; 2200 B.C.; p. 2461; 3 feet 6 inches; 4 Ib. 
2 oz. ; 2 hr. 4 min. 

NOTE. Astrophysical Journal and Botanical Gazette do not 
use a comma with four figures. 

1 Except in German and in Spanish, where a period is used instead, as: 69.190.175 . 



64 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

160. Separate month and year and similar time divisions 
by a comma: 

November, 1905 ; New Year's Day, 1906. 

NOTE. Astrophysical Journal and Botanical Gazette do not 
use a comma between month and year. 

161. Omit the comma, in signatures and at the beginning 
of articles, after author's name followed by address, 
title, or position in a separate line, or after address 
followed by a date line, etc. (see 65). 

162. The comma is always placed inside the quotation 
marks, but following the parenthesis, if the con- 
text requires it at all. 

APOSTROPHE 

163. An apostrophe is used to mark the omission of a 
letter or letters in the contraction of a word, or of 
figures in a number. In the case of contractions 
containing a verb and the negative, do not use space 
between the two components of the contraction: 

it's, ne'er, 'twas, "takin' me 'at"; m'f'g; the class of '96; 
don't, haven't. (See 123.) 

164. The possessive case of nouns, common and proper, 
is formed by the addition of an apostrophe, or 
apostrophe and 5 (see 113) : 

a man's word, horses' tails; Scott's Ivanhoe, Jones's farms, 
Themistodes' era; for appearance' sake. 

165. The plural of numerals, and of rare or artificial noun- 
coinages, is formed by the aid of an apostrophe and 
s; of proper nouns of more than one syllable ending 
in a sibilant, by adding an apostrophe alone (mono- 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 65 

syllabic proper names ending in a sibilant add es; 
others, s) (see 101) : 

in the i goo's; in two's and three's, the three R's, the 
Y.M.C.A.'s; "these I-just-do-as-I-please's"; "all the Tommy 
Atkins' of England" (but: the Rosses and the Macdougals); 
the Pericles' and Socrates' of literature. 

QUOTATION MARKS. (See section on "Quotations," 
74-91.) 

DASHES 

166. An em dash is used to denote "a sudden break, 
stop, or transition in a sentence, or an abrupt change 
in its construction, a long or significant pause, or 
an unexpected or epigrammatic turn of sentiment" 
(John Wilson) : 

"Do we can we send out educated boys and girls from the 
high school at eighteen ?" "The Platonic world of the static, 
and the Hegelian world of process how great the contrast!" 
" 'Process' that is the magic word of the modern period"; 
"To be or not to be that is the question"; "Christianity 
found in the Roman Empire a civic life which was implicated 
by a thousand roots with pagan faith and cultus a state 
which offered little." 

167. Use dashes (rarely parentheses see 177) for par- 
enthetical clauses which are both logically and 
structurally independent interpolations (see 150): 

"This may be said to be but, never mind, we will pass over 
that"; "There came a time let us say, for convenience, with 
Herodotus and Thucydides when this attention to actions 
was conscious and deliberate"; "If it be asked and in say- 
ing this I but epitomize my whole contention why the 
Mohammedan religion . . . ." 



66 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

1 68. A clause added to lend emphasis to, or to explain or 
expand, a word or phrase occurring in the main 
clause, which word or phrase is then repeated, 
should be introduced by a dash: 

"To him they are more important as the sources for history 
the history of events and ideas"; "Here we are face to face 
with a new and difficult problem new and difficult, that is, 
in the sense that . . . . " 

169. Wherever a "namely" is implied before a paren- 
thetical or complementary clause, a dash should 
preferably be used (see 132) : 

"These discoveries gunpowder, printing-press, compass, 
and telescope were the weapons before which the old science 
trembled"; "But here we are trenching upon another division 
of our field the interpretation of New Testament books." 

170. In sentences broken up into clauses, the final 
summarizing clause should be preceded by a dash : 

"Amos, with the idea that Jehovah is an upright judge 
. . . . ; Hosea, whose Master hated injustice and falsehood 
. . . . ; Isaiah, whose Lord would have mercy only on those 
who relieved the widow and the fatherless these were the 
spokesmen . . . ' 

171. a) A word or phrase set in a separate line and suc- 
ceeded by paragraphs, at the beginning of each of 
which it is implied, should be followed by a dash : 

"I recommend 

" i. That we kill him. 

"2. That we flay him." 

6) In French and in Spanish a dash is used before 
a speech in direct discourse instead of quotation 
marks before and after. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 67 

172. A dash may be used in connection with side-heads, 
whether "run in" or paragraphed: 

2. The language of the New Testament. The lexicons 
of Grimm-Thayer, Cremer, and others .... 

NOTE. The above has been taken from .... 

Biblical criticism in other denominations 

A most interesting article appeared in the Expository 
Times .... 

173. Use a dash in place of the word "to" connecting 
two words or numbers (see 158) : 

May- July, 1906 (en dash); May i, 1905 November i, 1906 
(em dash); pp. 3-7 (en dash); Luke 3:6 5:2 (em dash). 

But if the word "from" precedes the first word or 
number, do not use the dash instead of "to": 

From May i to July i, 1906. 

In connecting consecutive numbers omit hundreds 
from the second number i.e., use only two figures 
unless the first number ends in two ciphers, in 
which case repeat; if the next to the last figure in 
the first number is a cipher, do not repeat this in the 
second number; but in citing dates B.C. always 
repeat the hundreds (because representing a dimi- 
nution, not an increase) (see 158) : 

1880-95, PP- 1I 3~ 1 ^', 1900-1906, pp. 102-7; 387-324 B.C. 

NOTE. The Astrophysical Journal and Botanical Gazette re- 
peat the hundreds' 1880-1895, pp. 113-116. 



68 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

174. Let a dash precede the reference (author, title of 
work, or both) following a direct quotation, consisting 
of at least one complete sentence, in footnotes or 
cited independently in the text (see 85) : 

1 "I felt an emotion of the moral sublime at beholding 
such an instance of civic heroism." Thirty Years, I, 379. 
The green grass is growing, 

The morning wind is in it, 
'Tis a tune worth the knowing 
Though it change every minute. 

Emerson, "To Ellen, at the South." 

175. A dash should not ordinarily be used in connection 
with any other point, except a period : 

"DEAR SIR: I have the honor . . . ."; not: "DEAR SIR: 
I have . . . ."; "This I say it with regret was not done"; 
not: "This, I say it with regret, was . . . ." 

But in a sentence where a comma would be neces- 
sary if the parenthetical clause set off by dashes 
did not exist, the comma may be retained before 
the first dash: 

Darwin, the promulgator of the theory, though by no 
means its only supporter is regarded today, etc. 

And when the parenthetical clause set off by dashes 
itself requires an interrogation or exclamation 
point, such punctuation may be retained in con- 
nection with the second dash: 

Senator Blank shall we call him statesman or politician ? 
introduced the bill; If the ship should sink which God 
forbid! he will be a ruined man. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 69 

PARENTHESES 

176. Place between parentheses figures or letters used to 
mark divisions in enumerations run into the text: 

"The reasons for his resignation were three: (i) advanced 
age, (2) failing health, (3) a desire to travel." 

If such divisions are paragraphed, a single paren- 
thesis is ordinarily used in connection with a lower- 
case (italic) letter; a period, with figures and capital 
(roman) letters. In syllabi, and matter of a similar 
character, the following scheme of notation and 
indention should ordinarily be adhered to: 

A. Under the head of .... 

I. Under .... 

1. Under .... 

a) Under .... 

(1) Under .... 

(a) Under .... 

i) Under .... 

ii) Under .... 
(ft) Under .... 

(2) Under .... 

b) Under .... 

2. Under .... 

II. Under .... 

B. Under the head of .... 

177. Parentheses should not ordinarily be used for paren- 
thetical clauses (see 150 and 167) unless confusion 
might arise from the use of less distinctive marks, or 



70 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

unless the content of the clause is wholly irrelevant 
to the main argument: 

"He meant I take this to be the (somewhat obscure) sense 
of his speech that . . . ."; "The period thus inaugurated 
(of which I shall speak at greater length in the next chapter) 
was characterized by ...."; "The contention has been 
made (op. cit.) that . . . ." 

BRACKETS 

178. Brackets are used (i) to inclose an explanation or 
note, (2) to indicate an interpolation in a quotation, 
(3) to rectify a mistake, (4) to supply an omission, 
and (5) for parentheses within parentheses: 

(1) ' [This was written before the publication of Spencer's 
book. EDITOR.] 

(2) "These [the free-silver Democrats] asserted that the 
present artificial ratio can be maintained indefinitely." 

(3) "As the Italian [Englishman] Dante Gabriel Ros- 
[s]etti has said, . . . ." 

(4) JohnRuskin. By Henry Carpenter. ["English Men 
of Letters," III.] London: Black, 1900. 

(5) Grote, the great historian of Greece (see his History, 
I, 204 [second edition] ),.... 

179. Such phrases as "To be continued" at the end, and 
"Continued from . . . ." at the beginning, of 
articles, chapters, etc., should be placed between 
brackets, centered, and set in italics (see 73) and in 
type reduced in size in accordance with the rule 
governing reductions (see 86) : 

[Continued from p. 320] 
[To be concluded] 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 71 

ELLIPSES 

180. Ellipses are used to indicate the omission, from a 
quotation, of one or more words not essential to 
the idea which it is desired to convey, and also 
to indicate illegible words, mutilations, and other 
lacunae in a document, manuscript, or other mate- 
rial which is quoted. For an ellipsis at the begin- 
ning, in the middle, or at the end of a sentence four 
periods, separated by a space (en quad), should 
ordinarily be used, except in very narrow measures 
(in French three only, with no space between). 
If the preceding line ends in a point, this should 
not be included in the four. Where a "whole para- 
graph, or paragraphs, or, in poetry, a complete 
line, or lines, are omitted, insert a full line of 
periods, separated by em- or 2-em quads, according 
to the length of the line. But the periods should not 
extend beyond the length of the longest type-line: 

The point . . . . is that the same forces .... are still 

the undercurrents of every human life We may 

never unravel the methods of the physical forces; ..... 
but .... 

I think it worth giving you these details, because it is 
a vague thing, though a perfectly true thing, to say that it 
was by his genius that Alexander conquered the eastern 
world. 

His army, you know, was a small one. To carry a 

vast number of men .... 

"Aux armes! ... aux armes! ... les Prussiens!" 

"Je n'ecris que ce que j'ai vu, entendu, senti ou eprouve 

moi-me'me ... j'ai deja publie quelques petits ouvrages ..." 



72 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

181. An ellipsis should be treated as a part of the citation; 
consequently should be inclosed in the quotation 
marks (see 178 [3]). 

HYPHENS 

182. A hyphen is placed at the end of a line the remainder 
of the last word of which is carried to the next line 
(see section on "Divisions") and between many 
compound words. The modern tendency is in favor 
of writing as one two words which, when united, 
convey but one idea: 

schoolroom, workshop, headquarters. 

Thus far, however, this practice is only a tendency; 
there are many compound words which are better 
hyphenated than consolidated. The following 
rules are designed to cover such cases, but it must 
be remembered that they are not to be applied 
in all cases, and that a certain degree of judgment 
must be exercised in their use. 

183. Hyphenate two or more words (except proper names 
forming a unity in themselves) combined into one 
adjective preceding a noun, or into one pronoun. 

so-called Croesus, well-known author, first-class investment, 
better-trained teachers, high-school course, half-dead horse, 
much-mooted question, joint-stock company, English-speaking 
peoples, nineteenth-century progress, white-rat serum, up-to- 
date machinery, four-year-old boy, house-to-house canvass, 
go-as-you-please fashion, deceased-wife's-sister bill; the 
feeble-minded (person) ; but : New Testament times, Old 
English spelling, an a priori argument. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 73 

Do not hyphenate combinations of adverb and 
adjective where no ambiguity could result: 
an ever increasing flood. 

Where one of the components contains more than 

one word, an en dash should be used in place of a 

hyphen: 

New York-Chicago freight traffic, Norwegian-German- 

Jewish immigrant. 

But do not connect by a hyphen adjectives or par- 
ticiples with adverbs ending in "-ly"; nor such 
combinations as the foregoing when following the 
noun, or qualifying a predicate: 
highly developed species; a man well known in the neighbor- 
hood; the fly-leaf, so called; "Her gown and carriage were 
strictly up to date." 

184. Hyphenate, as a rule, nouns formed by the combina- 
tion of two nouns standing in objective relation to 
each other that is, one of whose components is 
derived from a transitive verb: 

mind-reader, story-teller, fool-killer, office-holder, well-wisher, 
property-owner; hero-worship, wood-turning, clay-modeling, 
curriculum -making. 

Exceptions are common and brief compounds, un- 
wieldy formations, or compounds with a special 
meaning: 

lawgiver, taxpayer, proofreader, bookkeeper, stockholder, 
freehand, schoolboy, schoolgirl (but: school man, to dis- 
tinguish from the Schoolmen of the Middle Ages) ; encyclo- 
pedia compiler; waterproof, concussionproof. 



74 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

185. A present participle united (i) with a noun to forma 
new noun with a meaning different from that which 
would be conveyed by the two words taken separately, 
(2) with a preposition used absolutely (i.e., not gov- 
erning a following noun), to form a noun, may 
properly take a hyphen : 

boarding-house, dining-hall, sleeping-room, dwelling-place, 
printing-office, walking-stick, starting-point, stepping- 
stone, stumbling-block (but meeting place) ; lean-to. 

186. As a general rule, compounds of "book," "house," 
"mill," "room," "shop," and "work" should be 
printed as one compact word, without a hyphen, 
when the prefixed noun contains only one syllable, 
should be hyphenated when it contains two, and 
should be printed as two separate words when it 
contains three or more: 

handbook, schoolbook, notebook, textbook; pocket-book, 

story-book; reference book. 

boathouse, clubhouse, schoolhouse, storehouse; engine-house, 

power-house; business house. 

commill, handmill, sawmill, windmill; water-mill, paper-mill; 

chocolate mill. 

bedroom, classroom, schoolroom, storeroom; lecture-room; 

recitation room; but: drawing-room (sitting-room) ; drawing 

room (for lessons) . 

tinshop, workshop; bucket-shop, tailor-shop; policy shop; 

handwork, woodwork; metal-work; filigree work. 

Exceptions are rare combinations, and such as for 
appearance' sake would better be separated: 
wheat mill, school work, home work, class work, book 
work, team work, source book. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 75 

187. Compounds of "maker," "dealer," and other words 
denoting occupation should ordinarily be hyphen- 
ated; likewise nouns combined in an adjectival 
sense before a proper noun: 

harness-maker, book-dealer, (see 184); a soldier-statesman, 
the poet-artist Rossetti. (Exceptions are a few short 
words of everyday occurrence: bookmaker, dressmaker, 
shopgirl.) 

188. Compounds of "store" should be hyphenated when 
the prefix contains only one syllable; otherwise not: 

drug-store, feed-store (but: bookstore); grocery store, dry- 
goods store. 

189. Compounds of "fellow" are hyphenated when 
forming the first element of the compound: 

fellow-man, fellow-beings; but: playfellow; "Mr. Good- 
fellow"; politics makes strange bedfellows. 

190. Compounds of "father," "mother," "brother," 
"sister," "daughter," "parent," and "foster" should 
be hyphenated when forming the first element of 
the compound: 

father-love (but: fatherland), mother- tongue, brother-officer, 
sister-nation, foster-son, daughter-cells, parent-word. 

191. Compounds of "great," indicating the fourth degree 
in a direct line of descent, call for a hyphen: 
great-grandfather, great-grandson. 

1 92. Compounds of " life " and " world " require a hyphen : 

life-history, life-principle (but: lifetime), world-power, world- 
problem. 



76 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

193. Compounds of "skin" with words of one syllable 
are to be printed as one word; with words of more 
than one, as two separate words: 

calfskin, sheepskin; alligator skin. 

194. Compounds of "master" should be hyphenated: 
master-builder, master-stroke (exception: masterpiece). 

195. Compounds of "god," when this word forms 
the second element of the compound, should be 
hyphenated: 

sun-god, rain-god (but: godsend, godson). 

196. "Half," "quarter," etc., combined with a noun 
should be followed by a hyphen: 

half-truth, half- tone; half-year, half-title, quarter-mile; but 
not the adverb "halfway." 

197. "Semi-," "demi-," "bi-," "tri-," etc., do not ordina- 
rily demand a hyphen, unless followed by i, w, or y: 

semiannual, demigod, bipartisan, bichromate, bimetallist, 
trimonthly, tricolor, trifoliate, semi-incandescent, bi- 
weekly, tri-yearly. 

Exceptions are long or unusual formations: 
semi-barbarous, semi-translucent. 

198. Compounds of "self," when this word forms the 
first element of the compound, are hyphenated: 
self-evident, self-respect. 

199. Combinations with "fold" are to be printed as one 
word if the number contains only one syllable; if it 
contains more, as two: 

twofold, tenfold; fifteen fold, a hundred fold. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 77 

200. Adjectives formed by the suffixation of "like" to 
a noun are usually printed as one word if the noun 
contains only one syllable (except when ending in 
/); if it contains more (or is a proper noun), they 
should be hyphenated: 

childlike, homelike, warlike, godlike; eel-like, bell-like; 
woman-like, business-like; American -like (but: Christlike). 

201. "Vice," "ex-," "elect," and "general," constituting 
parts of titles, should be connected with the chief 
noun by a hyphen: 

Vice-Consul Taylor, ex-President Cleveland, the governor- 
elect, the postmaster-general. (But do not hyphenate mili- 
tary terms such as: surgeon general, lieutenant general.) 

202 . Compounds of "by-," when this word forms the first 
element of the compound, should be hyphenated: 
by-product, by-laws (but: bygones). 

203. The prefixes " co-," " pre-," and " re-," when followed 
by the same vowel as that in which they terminate, 
or by w or y, or by any letter that forms a diph- 
thong with the last letter of the prefix, except in 
very common words, take a hyphen; but, as a rule, 
they do not when followed by a different vowel or 
by a consonant, except to avoid mispronunciation : 

co-operation, pre-empted, re-enter, co-worker, re-yield; 
but: coequal, coeducation, prearranged, reinstal; cohabita- 
tion, prehistoric, recast (but: re-use, re-read, co-author). 
NOTE. The Botanical Gazette prints: cooperate, reenter, etc. 

Exceptions are combinations with proper names, long 
or unusual formations, and words in which the 



78 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

omission of the hyphen would convey a meaning 
different from that intended (cf . 9, 19, 208) : 

pre-Raphaelite, re-democratize, re-pulverization; re-cover 
( = cover again), re-creation, re-formation (as distinguished 
from reformation). 

204. Omit the hyphen from "today," "tomorrow," 
"tonight," "viewpoint," "standpoint." (See 119, 
note.) 

205. The negative particles "un-," "in-," "il-," "im-," 
and "a-" do not usually require a hyphen: 

unmanly, undemocratic, inanimate, indeterminate, illimitable, 
impersonal, asymmetrical. 

Exceptions would be rare and artificial combinations. 
The particle "non-," on the contrary, ordinarily calls 
for a hyphen, except in the commonest words: 

non-aesthetic, non-subservient, non-contagious, non-ability, 
non-interference, non-evolutionary, non-membership, non- 
unionist; but: nonage, nondescript, nonessential, nonplus, 
nonsense, noncombatant. 

206. " Quasi-" prefixed to a noun or an adjective requires 
a hyphen: 

quasi-corporation, quasi-historical. 

207. "Over" and "under" prefixed to a word should not 
be followed by a hyphen, except in unusual cases: 

overbold, overemphasize, overweight, underfed, underestimate, 
undersecretary; but: over-soul, under-man, over-spiritualistic. 

208. The Latin prepositions "ante," "infra," "inter," 
"intra," "post," "sub," "super," and "supra," 
and the Greek preposition "anti" prefixed to a 



MANUAL OF STYLE: PUNCTUATION 79 

word do not ordinarily require a hyphen, unless fol- 
lowed by the letter with which they terminate, or, 
in the case of those prefixes ending in a vowel, 
by -w, by -y, or by a vowel which would form a 
diphthong in conjunction with the terminal letter: 

antedate, antechamber, antediluvian, inframarginal, inter- 
national, interstate, intercity, intramural, postscript, post- 
graduate, postprandial, subconscious, submarine, subtitle, 
subway, superfine, supraliminal, antidote, antiseptic (but: 
anti-imperialistic cf. 203), intra-atomic, ante-war, intra- 
yearly, ante-urban, anti-eclectic. 

Exceptions are such formations as 

ante-bellum, ante-Nicene, anti-Semitic, inter-university, post- 
revolutionary. 

209. "Extra," "pan," and "ultra" as a rule call for a 
hyphen : 

extra-hazardous, pan -Hellenic, ultra-conservative (but: 
extraordinary, Ultramontane). 

210. In fractional numbers, spelled out, connect by a 
hyphen the numerator and the denominator, unless 
either already contains a hyphen: 

"The year is two-thirds gone"; four and five-sevenths; 
thirty one-hundredths; but: thirty-one hundredths. 

But do not hyphenate in such cases as 

"One half of his fortune he bequeathed to his widow; the 
other, to charitable institutions." 

211. In the case of two or more compound words occurring 
together, which have one of their component elements 



8o THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

in common, this element is frequently omitted from 
all but the last word, and its implication should be 
indicated by a hyphen : 

in English- and Spanish-speaking countries; one-, five-, and 
ten-cent pieces; "If the student thinks to find this character 
where many a literary critic is searching in fifth- and tenth- 
century Europe he must not look outside of manuscript tra- 
dition." 

NOTE. Some writers regard this hyphen as an objectionable 
Teutonism. 

212. A hyphen is used to indicate a prefix or a suffix, as a 
particle or syllable, not complete in itself: 

"The prefix a-"; "The Spanish diminutive suffixes -ito 
and -cita. 

213. A hyphen is employed to indicate the syllables of a 
word: 

di-a-gram, pho-tog-ra-phy. 

214. Following is a list of words of everyday occurrence 
which should be hyphenated, and which do not fall 
under any of the foregoing classifications : 



after-years death-rate 
anti-trust first-fruits 
bas-relief folk-song 
birth-rate horse-power 
blood-feud ice-cream 
blood-relations loan-word 
coat-of-arms man-of-war 
cross-reference mid-year 


object-lesson title-page 
page-proof trade-mark 
pay-roll wave-length 
poor-law well-being 
sea-level well-nigh 
sense-perception well-wisher 
subject-matter will-power 
thought-process 



Otherwise Webster's Dictionary is standard for : 

bedrock Nonconformist trade unions 

farm land Pan-German un-Christian 

grown-ups sledge hammer word formation 

live stock standing room workingman 



MANUAL OF STYLE: DIVISIONS 8 1 



DIVISIONS 

215. Avoid all unnecessary divisions of words. Wherever 
consistent with good spacing, carry the whole word 
over into the next line. 

216. Do not, in wide measures (20 ems or more), divide 
on a syllable of two letters, if possible to avoid it. 
Never carry over a syllable of two letters. Good 
spacing, however, is paramount. Words of four 
letters like on-ly should never be divided; words 
of five or six like oc-cur, of-fice, let-ter rarely. 

217. Never let more than two consecutive lines termi- 
nate in a hyphen, if at all avoidable. The next to 
the last line in a paragraph ought not to end in a 
divided word; and the last line (the "breakline") 
should, in measures of 15 ems and up, contain at 
least four letters. Similarly, try to avoid a divided 
word at the bottom of a right-hand (recto) page. 

218. Do not divide proper nouns, especially names of 
persons, unless absolutely necessary. 

219. Do not separate (i.e., put in different lines) the 
initials of a name, or such combinations as 1496 A.D., 
6:00 P.M., 6 43. 6d. 

220. Avoid the separation of a divisional mark, e.g., (a) 
or (i), in the middle of a sentence, from the section 



82 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

which it precedes; i.e., do not allow such mark to 
fall at the end of a line, but carry it over with the 
matter to which it pertains. 

221. Divide according to pronunciation (the American 
system), not according to derivation (the English 
system) : 

democ-racy, not: demo-cracy; knowl-edge, not: know-ledge; 
aurif-erous, not: auri-ferous; antip-odes (still better: antipo- 
des see 224), not: anti-podes. 

As far as is compatible with pronunciation and good 
spacing, however, divide compounds on etymologi- 
cal lines, or according to derivation and meaning: 

dis-pleasure is better than displeas-ure; school-master, 
than schoolmas-ter; never: passo-ver, une-ven, etc. 

Never divide on a syllable with a silent vowel, 

such as: 

possi-ble, vex-ed, enti-tled, princi-ples. 

222. When two consonants meet between vowels, and 
the syllable ends on one consonant, the division 
may properly be made between the consonants, the 
pronunciation determining the place of division: 

advan-tage, exces-sive, finan-cier, foun-da-tion, impor-tant, 
In-dian, moun-tain, profes-sor, struc-ture. 

223. Do not terminate a line in a soft c or g y or in a j. 
Escape the division entirely, if possible; if not pos- 
sible, divide: 

pro-cess, not: proc-ess; ne-cessary, not: nec-essary; spa- 
cing, not: spac-ing (the rule being that in present parti- 



MANUAL OF STYLE: DIVISIONS 83 

ciples the -ing should be carried over); pro-geny, not: 
prog-eny; pre-judice, not: prej-udice. 

NOTE. This rule differs from that followed by Webster and 
other dictionaries. 

224. Divide on a vowel wherever practicable. In case a 
vowel alone forms a syllable in the middle of a word, 
run it into the first line: 

sepa-rate, not: sep-arate; particu-lar, not: partic-ular; 
criti-cism, not: crit-icism. 

Exceptions are words in -able and -ible, which should 

carry the vowel over into the next line: 

read-able, not: reada-ble; convert-ible, not: converti-ble. 

225. In hyphenated nouns and adjectives avoid additional 
hyphens: 

object-lesson, not: object-les-son; fellow-being, not: fel- 
low-being; poverty-stricken, not: pov-erty-stricken, much 
less: pover-ty-stricken. 

226. A coalition of two vowel-sounds into one (i.e., a 
diphthong) should be treated as one letter. There- 
fore do not divide: 

peo-ple (either syllable makes a bad division), Cae-sar 
(cf. 218), bu-ilding. 

227. In derivatives from words ending in t, the t, in 
divisions, should be carried into the next line with 
the suffix if the accent has been shifted; if the deriva- 
tive has retained the accent of the parent-word, 
the / should be left in the first line : 

objec-tive (from ob'ject); defect-ive (from defect'); but: 
respec-tively, distinc-tive. 



84 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

228. The addition of a plural s, adding a new syllable 
to words ending in an s-sound, does not create a 
new excuse for dividing such words: 

hor-ses and circumstan-ces are impossible divisions. 

229. Adjectives in -ical should be divided on the i: 
physi-cal, not phys-ical nor physic-al. 

230. Do not divide nothing. 

231. The following are condensed rules for dividing 
words in the foreign languages most frequently met 
with in proofreading. While perhaps not entirely 
comprehensive, they will be found to cover every 
ordinary contingency. 

FRENCH 

a) The fundamental principle is to divide on a 
vowel as far as possible, avoiding consonantal end- 
ing of syllables: 

in-di-vi-si-bi-li-te, a-che-ter; ta-bleau (not: tab-leau); 
ba-lancer (not: bal-ancer). 

6) Two consonants of which the second is / or r 
(but not the combinations rl, Ir), are both carried 
over to the following syllable: 

ta-bleau, e"-cri-vain, per-dre, qua-tre; par-ler, hur-ler. 

c) There are as many syllables as there are vowels, 

even if soundless: 

par-lent, vic-toi-re, pro-pri-e'-tai-re, guer-re, fil-les; 



MANUAL OF STYLE: DIVISIONS 85 

but a mute e following a vowel does not form a 

syllable: 

e-taient, joue-rai; 

and i, y, o, ou, u, when preceding other vowels, are 

often sounded as consonants, and then do not form 

a syllable: 

bien, 6-tions, yeux, loin, fouet-ter, 6-cuel-le. 

GERMAN 

a) The fundamental principle is to divide on a 
vowel as far as possible: 

hii-ten, le-ben, Fa-brik. 

b) If several consonants stand between vowels, 
usually only the last is carried over: 

Rit-ter, klir-ren, Klemp-ner, Ver-wand-te, Karp-fen. 

c) sz, ch, sch, ph, st, th are never separated (but see 
(/) below): 

Bu-sze, Be-cher, Ha-scher (but: Haus-chen), Geo-gra-phie, 
La-sten, Ma-thilde. 

d) If ck must be divided, it is separated into k-k: 
Deckel Dek-kel. 

e) In foreign words (Fremdivorter) , combinations of 
b, d, g, k, p, t, with I or r are carried over: 
Pu-bli-kum, Me-trum, Hy-drant. 

/) Compound words are separated first into their 
component elements, and within each element the 
foregoing rules apply: 
Fursten-schlosz, Tur-an-gel, Inter-esse. 



86 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

ITALIAN 

a) The fundamental principle is to divide on a 
vowel as far as possible: 

ta-vo-li-no, nar-ra-re. 

b) s before a consonant, r following a consonant, 
ch, gh, gli (gl), gn, qu, sc, d, fl, gl, pi are never 
separated: 

ca-sti-ghi, a-vro, mi-gli6-re, bi-so-gno, in-chi6-stro, u-scire. 

c) i=y and u=w go with the following vowel; 
ac, au, ei, eu, oi are not separated: 

miei, tuoi. 

SPANISH 

a) The fundamental principle is to divide on a 
vowel as far as possible: 

ca-ra-co-les, re-ba-no, fle-xi-bi-li-dad. 

b) br, bl, ch, cl, cr, dr, II, pr, rr, tr, and n, being 
regarded as simple consonants, follow the fore- 
going rule; cc and nn are divided, as in English: 
mu-cha-cho, ba-ta-lla, bu-116, ba-rre-rio, ci-ga-rro; ac-ce-so, 
en-no-ble-cer, in-ne-ga-ble. 

c) The liquid consonants / and r, when preceded by 
any consonant other than s, must not be separated 
from that consonant, except in uniting parts of 
compound words: 

ha-blar, po-dria, ce-le-bra-ci-on, si-glo; but sub-lu-nar, 
sub-ra-yar, es-la-bon. 

d} Two separable consonants should be divided; 
5 is always disjoined from a following consonant: 
cuer-da, chas-co, pron-to; has-ta, as-pi-rar, cons-pi-rar. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: DIVISIONS 87 

GREEK 

a) Single consonants, combinations of consonants 
which can begin a word, and mutes followed by p 
or v are placed at the beginning of a syllable: 

-^o), e-yw, e-OTre-pa, ve'-Krap, d-K/x,?7, Se-oytds, /ni-xpov, Trpa- 
y/ia-Tos, yi-yvd>-<rKw. 

Other combinations of consonants are divided: 

irpacr-crw, eA-7rts, v-8ov, ap-/ta-Ta. 

6) Compound words are divided into their original 
parts; subject to that the foregoing rule applies: 

7rpo<r-a-y<i>, 7rap-a-yw. 

LATIN 

a) A Latin word has as many syllables as it has 
vowels or diphthongs (ae, au, oe, ei, eu, ui). 

b) When a single consonant occurs between two 
vowels, divide before the consonant: 

Cae-sar, me-ri-di-es. 

c) In the case of two or more consonants divide 
before the last consonant, except in the combina- 
tions: mute (p, ph, b, t, th, d, c, ch, g)+liquid (/, r), 
and qu or gu: 

om-nis, scrip-tus, cunc-tus (but: pa-tris, e-quus, lin-gua). 

d) Compound words are separated first into their 
component elements, and within each element the 
foregoing rules apply: 

ad-est, ab-rum-po, red-e-o, trans-i-go. 



88 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



FOOTNOTES 

232. For reference indexes, as a rule, use superior figures. 
Only in special cases should asterisks, daggers, etc., 
be employed (see 234); for instance, in tabular or 
algebraic matter, where figures would be likely to 
cause confusion. Index figures in the text should be 
placed after the punctuation marks, without space, 
except in German, where they are placed inside: 

.... the niceties of style which were then invading Attic 
prose, 1 and which made .... 

1 In particular the avoidance of hiatus. 
p^y+jt* 

* Schenk's equation. 

When figures are not used, the sequence of indexes 
should be: 

* ("asterisk" or "star"), f ("dagger"), % ("double dagger"), 
("section mark"), || ("parallels"), ^ ("paragraph mark"). 

233. Where references to the same work follow each 
other closely and uninterruptedly, use ibid, instead 
of repeating the title. Thus ibid, takes the place 
of as much of the previous reference as is repeated: 

Spencer, Principles of Sociology, chap, iv., p. 128. 

Ibid., p. 129. 

Barnes, "Charles Stunner," Jour, of Pol. Econ., XXXV, 427. 

Ibid., p. 435- 

Ibid, should, however, not ordinarily be used for 
the first footnote on a verso (left-hand) page; it is 



MANUAL OF STYLE: FOOTNOTES 89 

better usage either to repeat the title or, if the 
reference is to the whole citation, to use loc. cit. 
(the place cited) or op. cit. (the work cited) or 
a.a.O. (am angezeigten Orte) in German: 

'Smith, Wealth of Nations, p. 289. 

3 Loc. cit. (on verso page if exactly the same place is cited), or 

3 Smith, op. cit., p. 290. 

However op. cit. is not used to repeat the title of a 
journal, but it may be used to refer to an author's 
work in a periodical and should not be used with- 
out the author's name clearly in text or footnote. 

234. Footnotes to tables, whether the tables are ruled or 
open, should be in 6 pt, and should invariably be 
placed at the foot of the table and not at the foot of 
the page. For reference indexes in such cases use 
asterisks, etc., and not superior figures (see 232). 

235. If the author's name is given in the text in connec- 
tion with a reference to, or a quotation from, his 
work, it should not be repeated in the footnote: 

.... This theory is questioned by Herbert, as follows- 
"I cannot admit . . . ."' 

1 Laws of the Ancients, 1, 153. 

236. It is better to place the index figure in the text at 
the end of the quotation (see illustration above). 

237. Ordinarily, omit "Vol.," "chap.," and "p." in paren- 

thetical or footnote references to particular pas- 
sages. Use Roman numerals (capitals) for Volume, 



90 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Book, Part, Division, except in reference to ancient 
classical works, when lower-case roman numerals 
should be used; Roman numerals (lower-case) for 
chapter and pages of introductory matter (Preface, 
etc.) ; and Arabic numerals for number (Heft) and 
text pages. Only when confusion would be liable 
to arise, use " Vol.," "p.," etc., in connection with the 
numerals; but where the reference is to a page, un- 
accompanied by further details, the abbreviation 
"p." or "pp." must of course be used. In text 
matter, not parenthetical, spell out chapter, verse, 
page, line, note, figure, etc. In classical references 
use no comma between author's name and the title 
of his work, and no comma following the title, unless 
"Vol.," "p.," or some kindred symbol is used. In 
all references to divisions of classical or ancient 
works use periods in place of commas, reserving the 
comma to indicate a succession (of pages, etc.) : 

1 Miller, French Rev. (ad ed.; London: Abrahams, 1888), 
II, Part IV, iii. 

* S. I. Curtiss, "The Place of Sacrifice among Primitive 
Semites," Biblical World, XXI (1903), 248 ff. 

JP. 63; pp. 27-36. 

* Cicero De officiis i. 133, 140. 
*De div. per somn. i, p. 4630. 

'Fraser, The Golden Bough*, I, 27 [superior figure within 
punctuation indicating number of the edition]. 

The same practice prescribed for classical references 
is frequently desired by authors with respect to 
English references, and may with equal propriety 
be followed: 



MANUAL OF STYLE: FOOTNOTES 91 

1 W. W. Greg Pastoral Poetry and Pastoral Drama (London 
1906) 114. 

238. The date of publication in a reference to a periodical 
should be put in parentheses immediately following 
the volume number: 

1 Barnes, "Lester Frank Ward," Amer. Jour, of Social., XXV 
(1919), 89. 

If the citation is to month, year, and page only, the 
date may appear in its natural order with commas: 

3 "Problems of Reconstruction," Journal of Political Economy, 
May, 1919, p. 89. 

239. In work set on the linotype machine, footnotes should 
be renumbered consecutively through each article, 
in a journal, or through each chapter, in a book, 
to save resetting in case of change (see "Hints to 
Authors and Editors," note under "Footnotes," 
p. 122). 

NOTE. Exceptions to these rules are footnotes in the Botani- 
cal Gazette and the Astrophysical Journal, which have adopted 
the following styles: 

Botanical Gazette 

1 LIVINGSTON, B. E., (i) On the nature of the stimulus which 
causes the change in form of polymorphic green algae. BOT. 
GAZ. 30:289-317. 1900. 

3 , (2) The heredity of sex. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. 

40:187-218. 1903. 

Astrophysical Journal 

1 " Revision of Wolf's Sun-Spot Relative Numbers," Monthly 
Weather Review, 30, 171, 1902. 

3 Astrophysical Journal, 10, 333, 1899. 

Botanical Gazette numbers its footnotes consecutively through- 
out an article; all the other journals of the University of Chicago 
Press number their footnotes from i up on each page, except 
in special cases. 



92 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



INDEXING 

240. In indexes of proper names and other similar 
alphabetical lists the following rules should be 
observed : 

a) Names beginning with M', Me, Mac, or St., 
Ste., whether the following letter is capitalized or 
not, should be listed as if the prefix were spelled 
Mac, Saint, Sainte, thus making it unnecessary 
for one who consults the index to look in several 
places to make sure of rinding the name sought: 

Machiavelli St. Louis 

M'Intyre, Henry Sainte Beuve 

Mclntyre, James Salt Lake City 

Maclntyre, Thomas 
Mack, Joseph 

&) Compound names should be listed under the 
first part of the name. List the other parts of 
the names in their respective alphabetical positions 
and give a cross-reference to the first: 

Campbell-Bannerman, Sir Henry 

Stratton-Porter, Gene 

Watts-Dunton, Theodore 

Porter, Stratton, Gene. See Stratton-Porter 

On the other hand, in the case of hyphenated 
names gratuitously adopted, as in the case of 
married women adding the maiden name to the 
married name, the name preceding the hyphen 
may be disregarded, and listing should be under 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEXING 93 

the letter of the true name, with a cross-reference 
under the name preceding the hyphen. 
c) Names with prefixes should be listed under the 
part following the prefix, except (i) in English 
(see b above); (ii) in French when the prefix 
consists of or contains the article; (iii) in Italian 
and Spanish when the prefix consists simply of the 
article; (iv) in Dutch, the "Van," "Ten," etc., being 
always capitalized (see 3, note); (v) when the 
prefix and the name are written as one word. 
Naturalized names with prefixes should be treated 
according to the rules for the language adopted. 

Hoffman, von; Lima, de; Ponte e Horto, da; Santos 

Pereira Jardin, dos. 

English: A Becket; De Quincey; De Morgan; D 'Israeli; 

MacDonald; Van Buren. 

French: DuMoncel; La Rochefoucauld ; LeSage; DuPin; 

Du Bocage; but: Rosny, de; Bouille, de; Allard, de. 

Italian and Spanish: La Lumia; La Farina; Lo Gatto; 

but: Farina, da; Rio, del; Torre, della. 

Prefix compounded with the name: Vanderkinde, Zurlauben, 

Dechambre, Vanderhoeck, Delacroix. 

In the case of the exceptions above noted the 
first letter of the prefix governs the alphabetical 
position of the name. 

d} Names spelled with the umlaut a, o, ii should 
be listed as if the umlaut were spelled out ae,oe, ue: 

Miiller, A. 
Mufola, C. 
Muller, B. 



94 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

e) Names having two parts, or names of firms, 
connected by "and," "&," "y" (Spanish), "et" 
(French), "und" (German), or "e" (Italian), 
should be listed according to the first letter of the 
name preceding the connective: Smith & Evans 
(under "S"); Gomez y Pineda (under "G"); 
Loubet et Meunier (under "L"); Duncker und 
Humblot (under "D"); Sandrone e Vallardi 
(under "S"). , 

/) On the subject of cross-references see 62. 
g) In indexing general terms the alphabetical ar- 
rangement of subdivisions is much more useful 
than the numerical order of page numbers; but in 
so arranging such material only the first principal 
word should be taken, i.e., adjective, noun, verb, 
adverb, not the article, conjunction, or preposition: 

Numbers: beginning a sentence, 73; in connected groups, how 
treated, 73; consecutive treatment of, 113, 119; round, treat 
ment of, 73; use of dash in consecutive, 119. 

ti) Indexes are usually set in 6 or 8 pt. double 
column, allowing i pica between columns. Entries 
are separated by extra leads. Matter is usually 
set flush and hang i em with solid runovers. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TABULAR WORK 95 



TABULAR WORK 

241. In n-pt. and zo-pt. matter open (unruled) tables 
should ordinarily be set in 9 pt. leaded; ruled, in 
8 pt. solid. In 9-pt. matter both open and ruled 
tables should be set in 8 pt. solid. In 8-pt. matter 
open tables should be set in 6 pt. leaded; ruled, in 
6 pt. solid. In 6-pt. matter both open and ruled 
tables should be set in 6 pt. solid. For columns 
representing totals, averages, percentages, and 
generalizations italic and black-face figures may 
be used if desired to set off the various classes of 
results. (See Table III, p. 100.) 

242. Captions for the columns of open tables and box- 
heads for ruled tables should ordinarily be set in 
6 pt. Box-heads of open tables should be 6-pt. caps 
and lower case unless subheads are used, in which 
case caps and small caps are used for the upper 
head (see Table III, p. 100). In ruled tables with 
box-heads of several stories the upper story pri- 
mary heads should be set in caps and small caps, 
except where the second story consists of figures 
only (see Table I, p. 98) ; the lower secondary in 
caps and lower case. Wherever small caps are 
used in box-heads, the heading for the "stub" (i.e., 
first column) should, as a rule, also be set in caps 
and small caps. 



96 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

243. In ruled tables there should be at least two leads' 
space between the horizontal rules and the matter 
inclosed, and, if practicable, at least the equivalent 
of an en quad, of the type in which the body of 
the table is set, between the perpendicular rules and 
the matter inclosed. 

244. In open tables either periods, one em apart and 
aligned, or leaders, may be used between the col- 
umns (see 248). In ruled tables, in the "stub," 
leaders should usually be employed, if there is room, 
except in case the stub runs over and a brace is 
necessary. (A leader is a piece of type, having dots 
["period leader"] or short lines ["hyphen leader"] 
upon its face, used in tables, indexes, etc., to 
lead the eye across a space to the right word or 
number.) An en leader is used instead of a 
decimal point in tables. 

245. In ruled columns of figures, to express a blank use 
leaders across the full width of the column. Cen- 
ter the figures in the column; if they cannot be put 
in the exact center, and there is an unequal number 
of digits in the groups, leave more space on the left 
than on the right. All decimals and dollar signs 
or other concrete values should be aligned. 

246. When there is reading-matter in the columns of a 
ruled table, it should be centered, if possible; if any 
line runs over, use hanging indention, and align all 
on the left. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TABULAR WORK 97 

247. Double rules should be used at the top of all tables, 
but perpendicularly, as a usual thing, only when a 
table is doubled up on itself and the stub is re- 
peated. (See Table IV, p. 100.) In continued 
broadside tables, where the heading is not repeated 
use a single rule only. Repeat heading on each 
even page. 

248. Tables of two columns only should be set open; 
of three or more, ruled, except in such a case as 
the table on page 99. All continuations of tables 
should be of the same dimensions, even if blank 
columns are necessary, and tables with identical 
headings should stand parallel. 

249. "Table I," etc., in headlines of tables should ordi- 
narily be set in caps of the type in which the body of 
the table is set and should not exceed the width of 
the table; the following (descriptive) line, if any, 
should be set in caps and small caps of the same 
type. A single descriptive headline, not pre- 
ceded by the number of the table, should be set 
in caps of the type in which the table is set. A 
footnote to the table should be set in 6 pt. with a 
paragraph indention, and should not exceed the 
width of the table. But when 6-pt. and 8-pt. ruled 
tables are both used in the same work, use 8-pt. 
headings over all tables (see 234). When tables 
containing footnotes run over several pages, it is 
necessary to repeat the footnotes on each even page. 



98 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

250. Specimen tables for illustration: 

TABLE I 
DISTRIBUTION OF STARS IN EIGHT CLUSTERS 



Plate (Exp.) 


Ring 


Sectors 


Mean 


15 


4S 


165 


195 



N.G.C. 5024, MESSIER 53 





fo*.. 




2/1/1 






?25 




I 


385 


^84 


362 


376 


S7O 


102 (ISO"").. 


II 


200 


182 


189 


200 


196 




III. . . . 


100 


92 


94 


106 


97 




IV 


44 


28 


34 


42 


38 



N.G.C. 5272, MESSIER 3 





fo*.. 




4CQ 






466 




I 


48 


S6 


4.2 


60 


C4 


64 (5 m ) 


II 


20 


14 


16 


I? 


18 




III. . . . 


8 


10 


12 


6 


8 




[IV 


3 


10 


6 


6 


6 




(o 




669 






680 




I 


168 


IC2 


137 




177 


6s(iS m )--- 


II 


70 


68 


69 


54 


75 




III. . . . 


26 


22 


29 


20 


30 




[IV 


6 


14 


16 


10 


15 



* Radius of central area .05. 

SPACES BETWEEN NINE-UNIT LEADERS 
(For Eight Point) 

Nine-unit leaders with one en between 

With one em between 

With one and one-half ems between 

With two ems between . 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TABULAR WORK 



99 



(For Nine Point) 
Leaders with one en between 


With one em between .... 








With one and one-half ems between 


With two ems between . 










THICKNESS 


TOTAL 

THICKNESS 


No. 


Feet 


Inches 


Feet Inches 


8. One layer of gray limestone . . . 


4 





2 9 


7. Layer similar to one above. . . . 


2 


2 


6 9 


6. Massive light-gray layer. No 








fossils noted 


2 


o 


4 7 


5. Shale parting 


o 


I 


" . / 

I 7 


4. Grayish limestone 




o 


I 

i 6 


3. Bluish shales 


2 


y 

2 


o o 


2. Limestone, hard and fossiliferous 


5 


\J 

4 


y 

8 6 


i. Gravish to bluish shales. . 


1 


2 


3 2 



TABLE II Continued 



Method 


a 


No. Stars 


I. From variable stars 


o" 00008 


2 


II. From Kapteyn's luminosity-curves: 

C.I. 0.39 to O.2O 


.000005 


i? 


" <-0 10 


.000007 


C2 


" (Pv. mag. < 15. 30).... 
" o. 10 to o.oi 


.000009 
.00003 


23 



All colors 


.00005 


49 c 


III. From Russell's data for absolute mag- 
nitude: 
C.I. < o.io 


.00005 


C2 


All colors 


oToooio 


495 








Provisionally adopted mean 


oToooo3 











ioo THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



TABLE III 



DISTRICT 


MEMBERS OF 
FAMILY GROUPS 


LODGERS 


TOTAL 


Number 


Percentage 


Number 


Percentage 


Stockyards . . . 
Jewish 


6,348 
8i3 
1,183 
12,657 
2,249 


73 
79 
95 
96 

73 


2,383 
220 


27 
21 


8,731 
1,033 


Bohemian .... 
Polish 


574 
835 


4 
27 


13,231 
3,094 


Italian 





TABLE IV 





Brine* 


Sea-Waterf 




Brine* 


Sea-W ater 


K. . 


1 . 37 


I. II 


HCO 3 . . 


O. 2O 




Na 


24.00 


20. ?o 


Cl 


ee.Qe 


ec . 20 


Ca 


2 O2 


i . 20 


Br . 


O O4 


O. IQ 


Mg.. 


O. ?'? 


-I.TI 


I 


Nil 




Fe 






Si 


o.o? 




Al 
SO 4 


O.OI 

4.88 


7.60 


Percentage 
of salin- 






CO, 


Nil 


O.2I 


ity . . 


7.20 


3.3O 















* From Salt Creek, Salt Point Peninsula, Lake Winnipegosis. Professor 
M. A. Parker, analyst. 

t Mean of 77 analyses by W. Dittmar. 



SECOND YEAR 

Electives 
(Two to be taken) 

Latin 

Modern History .... 

German 

French 

Cooking or Sewing 
Music and Drawing . 
Public Speaking .... 
Stenography 



Periods 

5 

5 

5 

5 
IO 

3 
10 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TABULAR WORK 



101 



TABLE V 

MEAN ANOMALIES 



MEAN ANOMALIES 



CHARACTER OF STATIONS 


With Regard to Sign 


Without Regard to Sign 


Hayford; 
Depth, 
113.7 km. 


Bouguer 


Hayford; 
Depth, 
113.7 km. 


Bouguer 




0.009 
.001 

.001 
.003 
+ .001 

.002 
0.003 


+0.017 
+ -004 

.028 
.107 
.no 

.036 
-0.037 


0.018 
.021 

.019 
.020 
.017 
.019 

O.O2O 


O.O2I 

.025 
033 
.108 
.in 

.049 
0.050 




Stations in interior, not in 
mountanous regions 
Stations in mountainous 
regions, below sea-level. 
Stations in mountainous 
regions, above sea- level. 
All stations (except the two 
Seattle stations) 


All stations 





SYSTEMATIC VARIATION FROM HOMOGENEITY 
IN AX' 



Region 


Group 


AA 


AA' 


AA' Group cs, d 
minus 
AA' Group a, 6 


4200-4300 
5000-5100 


(C5, <*..-. 

IM 

/C5, <*...- 
la. . 


159 
.163 

.165 
.178 


.165! 

.164; 

i73\ 
.i8oj 


+O.OOI 
.007 




(d.. 


.ICC 


.168! 






\a.. 


. 1 70 


i 

.172 1 


.004 




[d.. 


.164. 


i75\ 




5200-5300 


{a.. 


.I7S 


/3 > 
.177] 


.OO2 




Id.. 


.177 


.187! 




5300-5400 


{a.. 


. 104 


.io6j 


- .OOQ 




tt.. 


. I(K 


. 2I2l 






if 


.212 


.2l6f 


0.004 













102 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



TABLE VI 

THE DISTRIBUTION OF EACH GROUP IN ENGLISH IN 
GRADES 6-2 TO 12-2 INCLUSIVE 



GRADES 



CLASS INTERVALS 


6-2 


7-2 


8-2 


9-2 


10-2 


II-2 


Junior High-School Group 


o? loo . 


42 

6 

65 
54 

i 

4 

I 

2 


33 
17 
72 

54 
3 


38 
54 
54 
44 

5 

i 


23 
40 
62 
52 
23 

I 


19 
24 

53 

7i 
13 

5 
9 

i 


IS 
23 

53 

78 
18 
9 

2 


QO- 04.00. . 


8s 80.00. . 


80 84.00. . 


7C 70.00. . 


7O 74 . 00 . . 


6< 60.00. . 


2 

I 


60 64. oo. . 






OS IOO 








Non- Junior High-School Group 


29 
6 
80 
58 

5 
5 

2 

3 


3 
IO 

77 
66 

3 


43 
9 
9i 
Si 

i 

4 


19 

32 

67 

59 
16 
6 

2 


19 

22 

44 
83 
18 

5 
5 


19 
13 

47 
84 
19 
8 
8 


OO 04 . 00 . 


8< 80.00. . 


80 84. OQ . . 


7C 7Q.OO. . 


7O- 74 . 00 . . 


6"> 60.00. . 


7 


60 64 oo . . 

















TECHNICAL TERMS 



EXPLANATION OF TECHNICAL TERMS 

THE POINT SYSTEM 

251. The point is the underlying unit of all typographical 
measures. 

252. The standard of measurement is the pica. A pica 
is twelve points (one-sixth of an inch). 

This line is set in 12 pt. (pica). 
This line is set in n pt. (small pica). 
This line is set in 10 pt. (long primer). 
This line is set in 9 pt. (bourgeois). 
This line is set in 8 pt. (brevier). 
This line is set in 7 pt. (minion). 
This line is set in 6 pt. (nonpareil). 
This line is set in 5 pt. (pearl) . 

The sizes larger or smaller than these are seldom 
used in book composition. 

STYLES OF TYPE 

253. Ordinary type is called roman. To "roman-quote" 
is to put in roman type between quotation marks. 

This line is set in roman. 

254. Type with a sloping face is called italic or italics. 
Italic is indicated in manuscripts by a straight line 
under the word or words (see p. 133)- 

This line is set in italics. 

105 



106 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

255. Type with a heavy black face is called bold face. 
Bold face is indicated by a wavy line (see p. 133). 
This line is set in bold face. 

256. The body of a type is called the shank; the upper 
surface, bearing the character, the face; the part 
of the face projecting beyond the shank, the kern; 
the part of the shank projecting beyond the face, 
the shoulder. 

257. A font, or complete assortment of a given size, of 
type includes large capitals ("caps"), small capitals 
("small caps"), and lower-case letters (so called from 
being placed in the lower half of the printer's case). 
Caps are indicated by three straight lines; small 
caps, by two (see p. 133). 

THESE ARE CAPS OF 9-PT. ROMAN. 

THESE ARE SMALL CAPS OF Q-PT. ROMAN. 

These are lower case of Q-pt. roman. 

SPACING 

258. The technical names for spaces and the methods of 
spacing depend on whether the "foundry" type (i.e., 
type set by hand) or machine-set type is in question. 
There are several makes of typesetting machines on 
the market, but of these the monotype (see 293) and 
the linotype (see 294) are in commonest use. 

259. The monotype and linotype machines have come 
into such universal use that a few words regarding 
their respective systems of spacing are proper: 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TECHNICAL TERMS 107 
MONOTYPE 

In monotype composition the unit system instead 
of the pica system of measurement is used. There 
are 18 units in a quad, which, unlike the em quad 
of the foundry type for hand composition, is not a 
perfect square at the end. The standard space 
(see 261) is a 6-unit space =3-em space; a 5-unit 
space =4-em space; a 4-unit space = a little less 
than a 5-em space, and is the smallest space in use 
on the monotype machine. These are cast from 
matrices, and represent "fixed" spaces, i.e., un- 
varying in width. On the other hand, in the pro- 
cess of composition on the keyboard, the swelling, 
or justifying, space is used to fill out a line. When 
it is evident that another word or syllable cannot 
be set in a line, the keys indicating the proper space 
are struck by the operator, and all spaces in the 
line are spread equally to fill out the line, resulting 
in spaces which do not necessarily contain a specific 
number of units (see 293). 

LINOTYPE 

260. On the linotype machine the pica system of meas- 
urement is used. There are three "fixed" spaces 
(see 261) : the em quad, the en quad, and the thin 
space, which is equal to a 4-em space. To spread 
the spaces, a space band is used; this band can 
spread a space to any size between a 3-em space 
and a space a trifle larger than an en quad. If a 



108 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

space smaller than a thin space is required, it must 
be put in by hand (see 294). 

FOUNDRY TYPE (AND GENERAL) 

261. An em, em quad, or simply quad (= quadrat) is a 
block of type the top of which forms a perfect 
square. A i2-pt. quad is thus a piece of metal 
one-sixth of an inch square at the ends. The term 
em is also used of the size of such a square in any 
given size of type as a unit of measurement. 
"Indent 8 pt. 2 ems" thus means that the line should 
be indented 16 points. An em quad is used between 
complete sentences (see 262). An em dash is a 
dash the width of an em. 

Two- and three-em quads are multiples of the above, 
cast in one block of type metal. Two- and three-em 
dashes are dashes the width of 2- and 3-em quads 
respectively. 

An en quad is half the size of an em quad in width. 
Thus an 8-pt. en quad is 4 points wide (thick) and 
8 points long (deep). An en dash is a dash the 
width of an en quad. 

A three-em space is one-third of an em hi thickness. 
This is also called a thick space, and is the standard 
space used to separate words. 
A four-em space is one-fourth of an em; a five-em 
space is one-fifth of an em. Four- and 5 -em spaces 
are also called middle and thin spaces. 
A hair-space is any space thinner than a 5-em. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TECHNICAL TERMS 109 

This line is spaced with em quads. 

This line is spaced with en quads. 

This line is spaced with 3 -em spaces. 

This line is spaced with 4-em spaces. 

This line is spaced with 5-em spaces. 

The letters in this word are hair-spaced: America. 

This is a 3 -em dash: 

This is a 2 -em dash: - 
This is an em dash: 
This is an en dash: - 

An em dash is often used in indexes and bibliog- 
raphies before the first word (without space) of 
subentries to save repeating. 
A 2-em dash is used to follow a date indicating 

time still continuing, as: 1876 . 

A 2-em dash is used without space after a word 
of which the ending is to be supplied. 
A 3-em dash is used (with space on each side) to 
denote a whole word omitted or to be supplied. 
A 3-em dash is also used in bibliographies to indi- 
cate the same author as above. 

262. Space evenly. A standard line should have a 3-em 
space between all words not separated by other 
punctuation points than commas, and after commas; 
an en quad after semicolons, and colons followed by 
a lower-case letter; two 3-em spaces after colons 
followed by a capital; an em quad after periods, 
and exclamation and interrogation points, conclud- 
ing a sentence. 



no THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

263. If necessary to reduce spacing in a line, begin with 
commas, and letters of slanting form i.e., with a 
large "shoulder" on the side adjoining the space; if 
necessary to increase, begin with overlapping let- 
ters i.e., with "kerns" protruding on the side 
adjoining the space straight-up-and-down letters, 
and points other than periods and commas (in this 
order). 

264. In a well-spaced line, with a 3-em space between 
a majority of the words, there should not be more 
than an en quad between the rest; this proportion 
should be maintained in increasing or reducing. To 
justify a line is to adjust it, making it even or true, 
by proper spacing. 

265. Do not follow an exceptionally thin-spaced line with 
an exceptionally wide-spaced one, or vice versa, if 
at all avoidable. 

266. Never hair-space, or em-quad, a line to avoid a 
run-over. 

267. Do not space out the last line of a paragraph that 
allows of an indention of an em or more at the end. 

268. Short words, like "a," "an," etc., should have the 
same space on each side. 

269. Use a thin space after , f, and similar signs; before 
"f.," "ff.," and the metric symbols: 

" 14. Be it further ordained . . . ."; pp. ioff.; i6cm. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TECHNICAL TERMS III 

270. In American and English sums of money no space 
is used between the symbols, $ and (pounds), 
5. (shillings) and d. (pence), and the numerals: 
$2.75; 10 35. 2d.; 10 C. 

271. After Arabic and Roman numerals at the beginning 
of lines, denoting subsections, there should be an 
en quad. After Arabic and Roman numerals at 
the beginning of center-heads there should be an 
em quad. Small-cap headings should have an en 
quad between the words; cap-and-small-cap and 
cap headings, two 3-em spaces. 

272. Scripture references should be spaced thus (use 
9-unit colon): 

II Cor. 1:16-20; 2:5 3:12. 

273. a) Between letters forming products, and before 
superior figures or letters indicating powers, and 
inferior figures or letters, ordinarily no space should 
be used: 

n x * = 2m 2 (v 2 z 2 zvwyz -\-2W*y*). 

b) In capitalized headings use aligning figures. 
INDENTATION (PRINTER'S TERM: INDENTION) 

274. In linotype composition in measures of less than 
10 picas' width, indent all sizes i em. In measures 
of from 10 to 20, indent u pt., i em; 10 pt., i|; 
9 pt., i^; 8 pt., i^; 6 pt., 2. In measures of from 
20 to 30, indent n pt., i^ ems; 10 pt., i^; 9 pt, if; 
8 pt., 2; 6 pt., 2^. This is for plain paragraphs. 



H2 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

In monotype composition indentions should be 
such that all paragraph indentions align irrespec- 
tive of the size of the type. The following inden- 
tions are a good standard for measures of 19 to 
30 picas: n pt. indented i^ ems or i em 9 units; 
10 pt. indented if ems or i em 12 units; 9 pt. 
indented if ems or i em 15 units; 8 pt. indented 
2 ems; 6 pt. indented 2 ems or 2 ems 9 units. 
Narrower measures should be indented proportion- 
ately less; wider, proportionately more. 
In hanging indentions, in measures of less than 10 
picas, indent all sizes i em; from 10 to 20, n pt., 
10 pt., 9 pt., and 8 pt., i ems; 6 pt., 2 ems; from 
20 to 30, ii pt., io-pt., 9 pt., and 8 pt, 2 ems; 
6 pt., 3 ems. 

275. In poetry center the longest line and let the inden- 
tion be governed by that; unless the longest line 
is of disproportionate length, in which case an 
average of the long lines should be struck, the idea 
being to give the whole a centered appearance. 
Where quotations from different poems, following 
each other in close succession, vary but slightly in 
length of verse lines, it is better to indent all alike. 
Indent according to rhymes and length of lines. In 
blank verse, where the lines are approximately of 
the same length, they should be aligned. If con- 
secutive lines rhyme, they should likewise, as a rule, 
be aligned. If the rhymes alternate, or follow at 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TECHNICAL TERMS 113 

certain intervals, indent the rhyming lines alike; that 
is, if, e.g., lines i and 3, and 2 and 4, rhyme, set the 
former flush in the measure previously determined by 
the longest line, and indent the latter (usually one 
em) ; follow this scheme in any similar arrangement. 
If any line is disproportionately short that is, con- 
tains a smaller number of feet indent it more: 

And blessed are the homy hands of toil ! 
The busy world shoves angrily aside 
The man who stands with arms akimbo set, 
Until occasion tells him what to do. 

I laugh at the lore and the pride of man, 
At the sophist schools and the learned clan; 
For what are they all, in their high conceit, 
When man in the bush with God may meet ? 

So nigh is grandeur to our dust, 

So near is God to man, 
When Duty whispers low, "Thou must," 

The youth replies, "I can." 

Not lightly fall 

Beyond recall 
The written scrolls a breath can float; 

The crowning fact, 

The kingliest act 
Of Freedom is the freeman's vote! 

276. In ordinary reading-matter "plain paragraphs" 
are always preferable. Where it is desired to bring 
into relief the opening word or words of a paragraph, 
or the number introducing such paragraph, or where 
a center-head makes more than three lines, " hanging 
indention" is often employed (see 284). 



H4 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

LEADS 

277. A lead is a strip of metal used to separate lines of 
type. The ordinary (standard) lead is 2 points 
thick. Matter with leads between the lines is 
called leaded; without, solid. 

This book, for the most part, is set leaded. This paragraph, 
for illustration, and the Index are set solid. Nearly all books 
are leaded. 

278. A slug is a strip of metal, thicker than a lead, used 
in the make-up of printed matter into pages, to be 
inserted after headlines, etc. The two standard 
sizes are 6 and 12 points (a nonpareil and a pica) 
thick, respectively. 

HEADS OR HEADINGS 

279. A center-head is a headline placed at equal distances 
from both margins of the page or column. Center- 
heads are usually set in caps or in small caps, and 
are not followed by a period. This is a center- 
head: 

SEC. VH. THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY 

When such center-head makes more than one line, 
either the (inverted) "pyramid" form (for two or 
three lines) or "hanging indention" (for more than 
three lines) is employed : 

ART EDUCATION FOR THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, AS SHOWN 

AT THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE EXPOSITION, m THE 

NORMAL SCHOOLS, AND IN ART SCHOOLS 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TECHNICAL TERMS 115 

ON CERTAIN IMPLICATIONS OF POSSIBLE CHANGES IN THE 
FORM AND DIMENSIONS OF THE SUN, AND SOME 
SUGGESTIONS TOWARD EXPLAINING CERTAIN PHE- 
NOMENA OF VARIABLE STARS 

280. A side-head is a headline placed at the side of the 
page or column. It may either be set in a separate 
line, in which case it is usually set flush that is, in 
alignment with the margin of the type-page; or 
run in that is, run together in a continuous line 
with the paragraph to which it belongs. The latter 
is the more common form. Side-heads are most 
frequently set in italics, only the first word and 
proper names being capitalized; sometimes in caps 
and small caps or in bold face (see 172) : 

Side-head 

A side-head is a headline .... 
Side-head. A side-head is .... 
SIDE -HEAD. A side-head is .... 

Side-head 

A side-head is .... 

281. A cut-in head is a head placed in a box cut into 
the side of the type-page, usually set in different 
type, and as a rule placed under the first two lines 
of the paragraph: 

In making inquiry, therefore, into the value of fraternity 

life among the children, it is necessary to test it entirely in 

accordance with its power to contribute to the 

r u P welfare of the school as a social whole. The 

school, being a social organization, has a right 

to demand that every individual contribute the best that is 

in him to the good of all. In making this contribution, it 



Ii6 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

282. A box-head is a head for a column in a ruled table 

(see 250). 

283. A running-head is a headline placed at the top of 
each page of a book, etc., usually giving the main 
title of the work on the left-hand (verso) page, and 
the title of the chapter, or other subdivision, on 
the right-hand (recto} page. It should be cen- 
tered on the page regardless of page number. A 
good working rule for running-heads is to set them 
in roman or italic capitals two sizes (points) 
smaller than the type of the text. 

PARAGRAPHS 

284. Two kinds of paragraphs are distinguished plain 
and hanging. A plain (or regular) paragraph has 
the first line indented, and the others set flush. A 
hanging paragraph ("hanging indention") has the 
first line set flush, and the others indented : 

Human Nature and the Social Order. By CHARLES HORTON 

COOLEY. New York: Scribner, 1902. Pp. viii+404. 

In terms of his own thesis Dr. Cooley has transformed 

the social materials of his times into a personal product; 

his mind has reorganized and reproduced the suggested, etc. 

PROOFS 

285. A galley-proof is a printed impression of the type 
contained in a long, shallow receptacle of metal, 
known as a galley, into which the compositor, the 
operator, or the casting-machine places the material 
as it is set, line by line. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: TECHNICAL TERMS 117 

286. A page-proof is an impression of the type material 
made up into page-form. 

287. A plate-proof or foundry -proof is a proof taken of the 
type-page immediately before an electrotype cast is 
made of it. This proof has a black border around 
the pages, made by ink from the metal frame used 
to hold the type in place while the cast is being 
made. Most publications nowadays are printed 
from such plates, and not directly from the type. 

288. A foul proof is a galley-proof containing author's 
corrections. 

289. A revise is a new proof of type corrected from a 
marked proof. 

MAKE-UP 

290. The arranging into page-form of type-lines and 
illustrations is called the make-up. 

291. A folio is a page-number. Even numbers are placed 
on the verso; odd, on the recto. A drop-folio is a 
page-number placed at the bottom of a page. 

292. A half-title or bastard title is the abbreviated title of 
a book placed on a separate page preceding the full 
title-page, or the title of a part, chapter, etc., preced- 
ing such part or chapter on a separate page in the 
body of the book. 



n8 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

TYPESETTING MACHINES 

293. The monotype named Lanston after the patentee 
is a composing-machine on which, by touching a key- 
board, perforations are made in strips of paper, which 
then are transferred to a second machine, where the 
matrices to which the perforations correspond are 
brought in contact with molten type metal, the 
characters being cast separately and arranged auto- 
matically on a galley in justified lines (see 259). 

294. The linotype named Mergenthaler after its in- 
ventor is a composing-machine on which, by 
touching a keyboard, the matrices from which the 
characters are cast arrange themselves automati- 
cally in lines in a receptacle, which then is brought 
in contact, on the same machine, with molten type 
metal, through a mechanical device which liberates 
and arranges in order on a galley the stereotyped 
strips, called "slugs," each consisting of a line of 
type (see 260). 



APPENDIX 



HINTS TO AUTHORS AND EDITORS 
PREPARATION OF MANUSCRIPTS 

Manuscripts should be either typewritten or in a 
perfectly clear handwriting. The former is preferable. 

The sheets should be of uniform size; 9"Xn" is a 
desirable size. 

Only one side of the paper should be used. 

Never roll manuscripts; place them flat in a box or 
an envelope. 

The sheets should not be fastened together except by 
pins or clips, which can easily be removed. 

When one piece of a page is to be fastened to another, 
use mucilage, not pins. Pins often become unfastened 
and the slips lost or misplaced. 

Liberal margins should be left at the top and left- 
hand side of the sheets. This space will be needed by 
the reader or printer for directions. 

The pages should be numbered consecutively. 
Inserted and omitted pages should be clearly indicated. 
Thus, sheets to be inserted after p. 4 should be marked 
"4A," "46," etc.; sheets omitted between p. 4 and p. 8 
should be indicated by numbering p. 4, "4-7." 

Additions to original pages should be placed after the 
sheets to which they belong, and should be marked 
"Insert A," "Insert B," etc. The places where they are 



122 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

to be inserted should be indicated by writing, "Here 
insert A," etc., on the margin of the original pages. 

PARAGRAPHS 

Paragraphs should be plainly indicated, either by 
indenting the first line or by a ^f mark. 

FOOTNOTES 

Footnotes should be clearly designated, either by 
separating them from the text by running a line across 
the page, or by using ink of different color. Some writers 
make a perpendicular fold in the paper, using two- 
thirds of the space for the text and one-third for the 
notes. 

The word in the text carrying the note should be followed 
by a superior figure corresponding to that preceding the 
note. 

Footnotes should never be run into the text in manu- 
scripts, whether in parentheses or otherwise. 

NOTE. It is important to remember that in matter set on the 
linotype machine the slightest change necessitates the resetting of the 
whole line. Since it is impossible to foresee how the notes will happen 
to come out in the make-up, it is impracticable to number them from i 
up on each page. The best way is to number them consecutively through- 
out an article or by chapters in a book ; bearing in mind, however, the 
very essential point that the change, by omission or addition, of one single 
number involves the resetting of the whole first line of each succeeding note 
to the end of the series, as well as the line in the text bearing the reference 
to the note. 

This difficulty is not met with in matter set on the monotype machine 
or by hand, where the change of a number amounts simply to substituting 
one figure for another. 



HINTS TO AUTHORS AND EDITORS 123 

PROPER NAMES, ETC. 

Proper names, foreign words, and figures should, in 
handwritten manuscript, be written with the utmost care 
and distinctness. 

TITLE-PAGES, ETC. 

Copy for title-pages, prefaces, tables of contents, etc., 
should be submitted with the manuscript. Copy for 
indexes should be compiled from the special set of page- 
proofs furnished for this purpose and promptly delivered 
to the printers. Unnecessary delay is often caused by 
postponing these details till the last minute. 

READING OF PROOFS 

Read and return your proofs promptly. 

In marking proof-sheets use the standard proofreaders' 
marks (see p. 133). Do not adopt a system of your own, 
which, however plain it may seem to you, might appear 
less so to the compositor. 

Be careful to answer all queries in the proofs. Delays 
and errors often result from not attending to them. 

Remember that changes in the type cost money. The 
omission or addition of a word in the middle of a para- 
graph may necessitate resetting the whole of this from 
that point on; and if such alteration is made in the page- 
proof, it may further involve repaging the entire article 
or chapter. Make your manuscript as perfect as possible 
before delivering it to the printer. Any necessary altera- 
tions should be made in the galley-proof, as each succeeding 



124 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

stage will add to the cost. Corrections in plates should 
be studiously avoided. Not only are they expensive, but 
they are likely to injure the plates. 

The original manuscript should in each instance be 
returned with the galley-proof, in order that the proof- 
reader may refer to it, should any question arise; and 
each successive set of proofs returned should be accom- 
panied by the previous marked set. This will assist in 
calculating the cost of alterations properly chargeable 
to you. 



HINTS TO PROOFREADERS 125 



HINTS TO PROOFREADERS 

Read everything as if you yourself were the author. 

Be particularly careful about proper names and figures 
and verify all dates. If the copy is not perfectly clear, 
or if you have reason to doubt its correctness, look it up, 
or query it to the author. 

In asking questions of authors or editors make your 
point clear. A simple query is not enough to draw 
attention to the particular point you have in mind. 
Queries in the manuscript should be transferred to the 
proof, or attention should be directed in the proof to the 
queries made by the copy-reader in the manuscript. 

Be discreet about your queries. Do not stultify your- 
self and discredit the office by asking foolish questions 
on the proof. The author will be thankful for any 
sensible suggestion you may make, but will resent trivial 
criticisms. 

Make a study of the "personal equation" in the case 
of those individuals (editors and others) with whom you 
as a proofreader will constantly have to deal. One person 
may expect of you as a matter of course what another 
might regard as an unwarranted interference. 

Never hesitate to correct anything that is palpably 
wrong, however positively the copy may assert the con 
trary. Remember that the blame for the error will 
eventually be laid at your door, and justly so. 



126 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

Do not follow copy blindly, unreasoningly. Follow 
copy only when, and as far as, it is correct. 

Do not ask authors or editors to decide questions of 
style. The Manual of Style is primarily meant for you. 
Learn its rules so that you may correct any violation of 
them you may find, without querying to the author. 

Do not fall into the fallacy that the author's or editor's 
O.K. relieves you of all or any part of your responsibility. 
Authors and editors depend on the proofreader to see to 
it that the typographical requirements have been met, 
and that the adopted style has been adhered to, and 
affix their signatures only on that supposition. 

Do not shield yourself behind your copyholder. The 
copyholder is there to assist you, not to tell you how to 
do things. If you think you have cause to doubt her 
version of a matter, investigate for yourself. 

Do not suggest to the copyholder the reading of a word 
or phrase which she has difficulty in making out from the 
manuscript. If she cannot decipher the manuscript, 
remember that you are the arbiter, and not the compositor. 

Do not read to the copyholder except in special cases 
in order to rest her after long, close work, and then pro- 
ceed slowly and very distinctly. The copyholder's eye 
and ear are not yet trained to follow copy with insertions 
and special editing as fast as you can read printed matter. 

Do not permit yourself to be stampeded. Cultivate 
speed, but remember that accuracy is even more impor- 
tant. If the necessary time is not given you, take it 
within reasonable limits in order to do things right. 



HINTS TO PROOFREADERS 127 

The credit accruing to you from doing things absolutely 
right is likely to outlast the displeasure at your lack of 
dispatch. 

In unavoidable cases of "rush," where conditions and 
orders are imperative, protect yourself by letting it be 
understood that you have done your best in the time 
allotted you, but that you must disclaim any further 
responsibility. 

After completing the reading, sign all galley-proofs 
and page-proofs in the upper right-hand corner with 
your own initial above that of the copyholder and re- 
viser. In case copyholding and revising are done by two 
different people the copyholder's initial should follow the 
reader's in smaller size above a line and the reviser's 
initial appear below. This will save time in tracing 
proofs and insure the giving of credit where it belongs. 

The number of proofs wanted should be marked on 
first readings before they are sent to the corrector. Look 
for any additional instructions on the job ticket or the 
composition ticket and on the copy or author's proofs. 

All proofs ready to be corrected are to be returned to 
the desk. When galley-proofs are ready to go out to the 
author, the copyholder should give the copy to the file 
clerk in perfect order, with proofs neatly arranged in the 
required number of sets, pinned together at the top. 

When you are reading page-proofs, the pages are to be 
revised by checking with author's alterations first. Next 
make copy for contents (unless the journal editor is in the 
habit of furnishing it) and return to be set. so that cover 



128 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

and contents may be ready to go out with the page- 
proofs. 

When you are reading galley-proof, the first thing to 
be read is the guide-line with size of type, width of 
measure, job number, and galley number. 

Mark the author's name and composition number at 
the beginning of each article, so that the compositor will 
be able to charge alterations correctly. Keep the last 
journal or sample beside you when reading the pages and 
verify style in every case if you are not perfectly sure 
of it. As fast as an article or a chapter is read, return 
it to the desk so that corrections may be made in time to 
be ready to go out as soon after you have finished the 
whole as possible. 

Read the running-heads and folios of each article or 
chapter as a separate operation after you have finished 
reading pages. Sign make-up record, as on pages, in the 
upper right-hand corner; enter date and hour of sending 
out proof in the lower right-hand corner of page-slip. 
Record number of pages and plates in each article or 
chapter and total number of pages in the finished product, 
including preliminaries. Be careful to see that the fin- 
ished book or journal will contain even forms of 16, 12, 
or 8 pages; if it does not, the question should be raised. 
Number and indicate all half-titles, blank pages, inserts, 
etc., and carry all necessary queries on every set of 
proofs. 

When pages are ready to go out, place them neatly 
in sets, pinned together at the top, and return them to 



HINTS TO PROOFREADERS 129 

the file clerk with all galley-proofs, and additional copy, 
if any, in order of make-up, and neatly pinned together. 
See that material is complete from cover to cover, includ- 
ing volume title and contents when such pages are due. 
Return all second proofs to file clerk's desk to file and 
leave page-slip on the hook, completed and dated. 



130 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



HINTS TO COPYHOLDERS 

Cultivate a low, soft, clear reading voice. Only your 
own proofreader has to hear you. 

Remember that, from the proofreader's point of view, 
the small words are as essential as the big ones. Get 
them all in and get them in right. 

Enunciate your plural s's distinctly. Try to perfect 
your enunciation so that you can read an entire galley 
without error. 

Regulate and equalize your speed. Do not race at a 
breakneck pace through typewritten copy, while you thread 
your path fumblingly through the mazes of manuscript. 

Do not keep guessing at a word. Look at it closely, 
consider the context, and do not speak it until you have 
made it out or at least made the very best guess of which 
you are capable. 

Give your reader a chance to make his corrections. 
Slow up the moment he puts his pencil to the paper. This 
will save your going over the same ground twice. Repeat 
cheerfully if the proofreader has not understood. 

Evolve your own system of signals. Do not, for 
instance, waste time by saying "in italics" for every word 
or letter so treated. Instead, raise your voice, or tap 
the table with your pencil once for each word, or both. 
Such a code need not be intelligible to others than your- 
self and your reader. 



HINTS TO COPYHOLDERS 131 

Read to your proofreader every instruction, editorial 
mark, and stet-mark carefully. Learn the job number 
and read it for every galley. 

Consult the job ticket for the number of proofs wanted 
and the name and address of the person to whom they 
are to be sent, before having proofs corrected, so that the 
number wanted may be marked for the printer. 

Be careful in transferring marks. A mark in the wrong 
place means two errors uncorrected in place of one cor- 
rected. Each set of proofs must carry every mark. 

In sending out proofs see that everything is there. 
Arrange the copy and proof-sheets neatly and consecu- 
tively. 

Copy all queries and make-up instructions on the 
galley-proof and indicate the insertion of tables, figures, 
charts, etc., where they are first mentioned. 

The manuscript should accompany the galley-proof; 
the foul proof (author's marked galley-proof) should 
accompany the page-proof. In case no galley-proof has 
been sent the manuscript should accompany the page- 
proof. 

Indicate in the lower left-hand corner the contents of 
all the envelopes you address. 

Fasten your pins in the center at the top, not diago- 
nally in the left-hand corner, thus covering up the direc- 
tions, etc., often written there. 

Return every evening to the file or the bookcase any 
volume that may have been taken out for reference dur- 
ing the day; return all proofs ready for filing at least 



132 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

once a day, so that files may be always as complete as 
possible. 

Remember that you are the housekeeper of the proof- 
room, and take pride in its neat and orderly appearance. 
Perfect your system so that everything can be located 
at a moment's notice. The more of that kind of work 
you do without being asked, and the better you do it, 
the more you will be appreciated. 



PROOFREADER'S MARKS 

d> Dele, or delete: take# out. 

9 Letter reversed turn. 

# Put insjrace. 



C 



CJo^e up no space. 



VA Bad v spacing^space v lnore /s evenly. 

***\ Wrojtfg font: character of wrong size or 

style. 
** Transp@e. 

^ake a new paragraph. 
D ^ndent; or, put in an em-quad space. 
C C Carry to the left. 

3 Cjirry to the right. 



X Ipiperfect type correct. 

vb Space showsloetween words push down. 

*S Straighte 11 crooked line. 

HStraighten aligTjJnent. 
Restore orjetain, words crossed out. 
Print (5!e*, rT, etc.) as a ligature. 
Words are omitted from, or in^opy. 
Query to author: Is this correct? 
Put in capitals. 

*** Put in^SMALL CAPITAfcfr. 

$** Put in LOWER CASE. 

****** Put in -fwwdf* type. 

Put in 44alie type. 
Put in bold face type. 

<w>^\ * 



133 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 137 



MODERN 



FIVE POINT NO. SIXTY-SEVEN 

[Solid] 



the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, tkey must have 




[Leaded] 

with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by 
his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sola 
successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of 
Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediterranean Sea, reaching to 
THE FROZEN NORTH AND THE TORRID SOUTH AS ITS NATURAL LIMITS, EXCHANGING THR 
VIKHIX ORES or SPAIN FOB THE LONG-SOUGHT SPICES OF ABABT THE BLEST, WAS THEBEFORE 1234567890 
But while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously had 1234567830 



FIVE POINT NO. FIVE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVEN 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, 
they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning-points in the world's 
history. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at vari- 
ance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in 
language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by the 
influence of one system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to the 
world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his conquests in the 
Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of 
Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, 

[Leaded] 

with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his 
small army against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite con- 
quests, show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius 
and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of 
the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of the early Diadochi 
had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to com- 
plete his work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of 
Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediterranean 
Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural limits, 
exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was 
THEREFORE NO VERY WILD IMAGINATION. BUT WHILE THOSE THAT 

HAD CONCEIVED IT AND 8TEIVEN FOB IT CONSCIOUSLY HAD FAILED 1234567890 

who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpect 12S4SS7890 
O,Oaa&ee6oup 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



MODERN 

SIX POINT MODERN NO. ONE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must 
have felt that they had reached one of the great turning-points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in language, in traditions, 
would now be directed by th will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by 
the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to the world. 
When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, men 
must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of 

[Leaded] 

the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome 
OF THE THIRD CENTURY, FRESH FROM HER SAMNITE CONQUESTS, SHOW 

WHAT WOULD HAVE BEEN THE SUCCESSES OF ALEXANDER, WITH HIS GIANT GENIUS AND 

armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror t 

(no figures with this italic) a at seceJIXE aou $*ttHH>' 

12345673 {>0 1234567890$ +x- = 
;_^ ~,_~-^ Six set braces to match this feet. 

SIX POINT NO. FIFTY-SEVEN 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all the 
civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, ia government, in language, in traditions, would now bo 
directed by the will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by 
the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to 
the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his con- 
quests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 

[Leaded] 

not unlike that of Rome ; for the conquest of the West would have been no 
difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. 
The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome of the 
third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been 
the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the 
younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams 
WAS HINDERED BY HIS EARLY DEATH, MOST OF THE EARLY 

DlADOCHI HAD EACH FOB MANY HARD-FOUGHT YEARS 1234567890 

aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work 1234567890 

AEIOO Afif6tf AElotr AEioCr Afilott Afilotr AgS HH$SST 

iEIOu Afil 6tf AElot AEloC AEIOC AE16C AgnS aeiou a616u ae!6n afiiOu aflloua61&a 
AEIOO AM6V ASlbtr At6& AWV AMOV f^ffM Thhs&tt 
Qeiou deiou beibii Q,eWQ. OSlott deiou d c ft B 8 P p <>. $ J 3 ft cdhh kfi s S t'u'? 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 139 



MODERN 

SEVEN POINT NO. FIFTY-SEVEN 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and 
of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great 
turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt 
that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by 
reason of contrasts in population, in government, in language, in tradi- 
tions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by the influence 
of one system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth 
to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from hia 
conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an 
empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West would 
have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against 
the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant 
genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. And 
if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early 

[Leaded] 

death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years 
aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regen- 
erate the distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Medi- 
terranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its 
natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought 
spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. But 
while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously had failed, 
who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpect- 
edly, by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, into the hands of 
a people who attained it, not by the direction of an Alexander, but by 
such national qualities as had gained for Sparta precedence and respect, 
coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of securing ever-widening 
frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Mace- 
donia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a 
CENTURY MIGHT INDEED FEEL UNEASY AT THE RESULT, 

IP HE WERE NOT, LIKE MOST OF THE STOICS, AN OPTIMIST 1234567890 

or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest gain 1234567890 
f&itrfS AfilOtf 64166 fteiofl A&16V A&16V &&U>ti, &&.&H AC 
AElOtT lElOtJ aelbu aelou A&ldtf AEIOU atldti, deiou &c& 
AElOft AfilOtJ aeloa SSI&a A310& AE10V aei&ti deiou dffl 



140 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



MODERN 

EIGHT POINT NO. FIFTY-SEVEN 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Car- 
thage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached 
one of the great turning-points in the world's history. There was 
no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at vari- 
ance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in 
government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed by 
the will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by 
the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, 
returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must have 
anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for 
the conquest of the West would have been no difficult matter to 
Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The 
successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome 

[Leaded] 

of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what 
would have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius 
and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. And 
if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his 
early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard- 
fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete 
his work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influ- 
ence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid 
South as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain 
for the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no 
very wild imagination. But while those that had conceived it 
and striven for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined 
THAT IT SHOULD DROP ALMOST SUDDENLY, UNEX- 
PECTEDLY, BY THE FORCE, NOT OF GENIUS, BUT OF 1234567890 

circumstances, into the hands of a people who 1234567890 

AEIOU AFJ6tf AEl6tr 116 A0uj3 AgNce^o^p 

AEU AEf66 AEioir AEOC AEIOU Aiou 80 aeiou e"iou aeibu a6i6u 
aelou &c.eno aelou deidu aeldii dSlon deidtt acn 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 141 

MODERN 

NINE POINT NO. FIFTY-SEVEN 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had 
reached one of the great turning-points in the world's history. 
There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations 
hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, in government, in language, in traditions, 
would now be directed by the will of one people, by the influ- 
ence of one system of law, by the predominance of a common 
language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young 
man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must 
have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of 

[Leaded] 

Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no diffi- 
cult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under 
his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, 
against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her 
Samnite conquests, show what would have been the successes 
of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of 
the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most 
OF THE EARLY DIADOCHI HAD EACH FOR MANY 

HARD-FOUGHT YEARS ASPIRED TO BE HIS SOLE 1234567890 

successor, hoping to complete his work 1234567890 
AEIOU AEI6U AElot AE16U AElOU AMOu AgN 

AElOU AEfOD AEl6e AEI60 AEloC AEIOtJ ACHHKffT 

aeiou a<f6u aei6u aeiou aeiou aeiou achhknt 
AEIOU AEf6u AEldU AEfdC AEIOU AEIOU If 8 

aeiou d6i6u aelbii aeiou aeWil aeiou acn 
CHH|KSSSTZZaaccdgiino6Q^s8suuuuyyzz 
H ff S T ' a e 'e h fr i i f s s t'u z D 8 d 1>\>p 033 



142 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MODERN 

ELEVEN POINT NO. SIXTY-FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall 
of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that 
they had reached one of the great turning-points in the 
world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all 
the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in govern- 
ment, in language, in traditions, would now be directed 

[Leaded] 

by the will of one people, by the influence of one sys- 
tem of law, by the predominance of a common language. 
It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet 
a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far 
East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
NOT UNLIKE THAT OF ROME; FOR THE CON- 

QUEST OF THE WEST WOULD HAVE BEEN 1234567890 

no difficult matter to Alexander, with 1234567890 



AEIOU Atil6tJ AM6U ifilOO AElOtf lEIOtJ 

AEIOU AEiou XMou AEIOU AEiiOO AEIOU AQHHKNSST 
aeiou 6e"16ti ae!6u &ei6u aeioti a6I6u achbknsst 

AEIOU AfilOV Afilbtr A&16V ABIOUAEIOV 

delou d6i6ti deidu diQti d&'ioii deiou a Q n 



hhistu ? 

D8 Dp 00 553* dp 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 143 

OLD STYLE 

FIVE POINT NO. EIGHT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have fell 
that they had reached one of the great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer anj 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in 
population, in government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, 
by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to the world. When Alex- 
ander was yet a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far Fast, men must have anticipated, 
as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome ; for the conquest of the West would have been no dif- 
ficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, 

[Leaded] 

with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, againsl 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realizations of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by 
his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole 
successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence oi 
Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the 
frozen North and the torrid South as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the 
LONG-SOUGHT SPICES OF ARABY THE BLEST, WAS THEREFORE NO VERY WILD 
IMAGINATION. BUT WHILE THOSE WHO HAD CONCEIVED IT AND STRIVEN FOR 1234567890 
it consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it should drop almost sudden! fjjjjfyigo 

TWELVE POINT NO. EIGHT 
[SMd] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 
the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must 
have felt that they had reached one of the great 
turning-points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
NATIONS HITHERTO AT VARIANCE, 

[Leaded] 
OR AT WAR, DISTRACTED BY REASON 1234567890 

of contrasts in population, in govern 123456'] 890 

AEioti Ai60 6 A g S 

AEIOU AEl6tr Etr E ACN ae'iou aelou aeu af6u acn 
A FT fill Aftffity APtl C ft 

ytiy_;yLxty siJ-^j.\j{j JTLJ^U ./- y. ^v 

aeiou d&iou aeu dtidti en 



144 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
OLD STYLE 

FODBTEEN POINT NO. EIGHT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius 
saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, 
they must have felt that they had reached 
one of the great turning-points in the 
world's history. There was no longer any 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto 
at variance, or at war, distracted by reason 
of contrasts in population, in government, 
in language, in traditions, would now be 

[Leaded] 

directed by the will of one people, by the 
influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand 
prospect had been held forth to the world. 
WHEN ALEXANDER WAS YET A 

YOUNG MAN RETURN- I 234567890 

ing from his conquests 1234567890 
AEIOU AfelOU A6U 6 A N 

AEiOu Aiou AEU A c, N 
aeioii aei6u aeu aefdii aon age 

. . A \. 

O O A u dod aeu e~u a n 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 145 



OLD STYLE 



EIGHTEEN POINT NO. EIGHT 
[Solid] 



When thoughtful Greeks like Poly- 
bius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they 
had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the 

[Leaded] 

civilized nations hitherto at variance, 
or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, in government, 
in language, in traditions, would now 
be directed by the will of one people, 
by the influence of one system of law. 
IT WAS NOT THE FIRST 

TIME THAT THIS 1234567890 

grand prospect 1234.567890 
AEOC A6C feO A ff 



146 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



MONOTYPE 

SIX POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, 
they must have felt that they had reached one of the turning-points in the world's his- 
tory. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, 
or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in language, 
in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by the influence of one 
system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to the world. 
When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, 
men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the 
conquest of the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the 
resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army , against 
the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would 
have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the 
younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was 
hindered by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought 
years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the 
distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

[Leaded] 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediterranean 
Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural limits, exchanging 
the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very 
wild imagination. But while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously 
had failed, who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, 
by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained 
it, not by the direction of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had gained 
for Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of secur- 
ing ever-widening frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Mace- 
donia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a century might 
indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most of the Stoics, an optimist or 
a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest gain of a great peace throughout the 
world, of the real settlement of disputes by the arbitration of an umpire with power to 
enforce his will; there was the consequent development of wide commerce with its 
diffusion, not only of wealth, but of enlightenment. These material gains were indis- 
putable, even though a dangerous monopoly was being established, not merely through 
the enormous advantages inseparable from Roman influence, but by the jealous de- 
struction of all those commercial centers which might have rivaled Rome by reason 
of favored situation or old traditions of trade. 

But far more serious was the patent fact, that neither the Roman people nor their 
HENCE IT RESULTED THAT THE COMMON PEOPLE DEGENERATED 

RAPIDLY INTO A VULGAR MOB, PURSUING SOLELY ITS MATERIAL I 234567890 

pleasures, and the dominant classes, when vast opportunities of wealth 1234567890 
XE!OU A16u Afctou AEf6u AEIOU X6I60 C. N f 
aeioU aeldu ael&u aeiou aeiou aeiou c ft c N 
aeioU diioa deidu dttou deidu MM f n 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 147 



MONOTYPE 

SEVEN POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the turning-points 
in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in 
population, in government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed 
by the will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to 
the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his con- 
quests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no 
difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. 
The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome of the 
third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been 
the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the 
younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams 
was hindered by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many 

[Leaded] 

hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work 
and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic 
culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediter- 
ranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural 
limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby 
the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. But while those that had con- 
ceived it and striven for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined 
that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, 
but of circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained it, not by the 
direction of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had gained for 
Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of 
securing ever-widening frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid strides of 
Philip's Macedonia ? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a century 
might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most of the Stoics, 
AN OPTIMIST OR A FATALIST. THERE WAS, NO DOUBT, THE 

MANIFEST GAIN OF A GREAT PEACE THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, 1234567890 

of the real settlement of disputes by the arbitration of an umpire 1234567800 

aeloii aeiou aeiou aei6u aeiou aeT6u c n 6 
aeiou deiou deiou deiou aeiou aeiou q n 5 & 



148 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



MONOTYPE 

EIGHT POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the 
great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer any 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in language, 
in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by the 
influence of one system of .law, by the predominance of a common 
language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth 
to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from 
his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, 
an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West would 
have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of 
Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, 
against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite 
conquests, show what would have been the successes of Alexander, 
with his giant genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler 
republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered 
by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard- 
fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his 
work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of 
Hellenistic culture. 

[Leaded] 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South 
as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long- 
sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. 
But while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously had 
failed, who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, 
unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, into the 
ANY POLITICAL THINKER WHO WITNESSED THIS 

MIGHTY OUTCOME OF HALF A CENTURY MIGHT 1234567890 

indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like m 1234567890 



AEIOU AEfoU AEI&U AftoU AEIOU AE*OU C N C 

aeloii aei6u aeiou def6u aeiou ae"I6u g n 

aeiou deiou aeiou deiou aeiou a&du $ n 

TDK H&H $$$T ddhfth H dhst ksttSS 4hms 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 149 

MONOTYPE 

NINE POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Cornith, they must have felt that they had reached one 
of the great turning-points in the world's history. There was no 
longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, 
or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in 
government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed 
by the will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, 
by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, 
returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must have 
anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; 
for the conquest of the West would have been no difficult matter 
to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. 

[Leaded] 

The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult 
Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his 
giant genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler 
republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was 
hindered by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each 
for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, 
hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted world 
by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
DROP ALMOST SUDDENLY, UNEXPECTEDLY, BY THE 

FORCE, NOT OF GENIUS, BUT OF CIRCUMSTANCES, 1234567890 

into the hands of a people who attained it, not by i 2 j 4 5 6 7 8 g o 

AEIOU AEIOU AEIOU AEIOU AEIOU AEIOU C N C 

aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou c n 
ae'ioii detail aeiou aeiou aeioii aSldii f n Q 
A HST dst HST dhsti 



150 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MONOTYPE 

TEN POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 

(Solid} 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had 
reached one of the great turning-points in the world's his- 
tory. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason 
of contrasts in population, in government, in language, in 
traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, 
by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance 
of a common language. 

[Leaded] 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young 
man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must 
have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of 
Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no diffi- 
cult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under 
his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, 
against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her 
Samnite conquests, show what would have been the successes 
of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of 
the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most 
A WORLD-EMPIRE, INCLUDING ALL THE LANDS 

AND NATIONS ABOUT THE MEDITER- 1234567890 

ranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North 1234567890 

AEIOU AEldft AEIOU AEIOU AEIOU AEIOIJ N 

aeioii aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aelou f a n 6 
ae'idii deioti aeldu deidu aeiou aeldti Q $ a n o 
D HH SST K dhhfykttt 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 151 

MONOTYPE 

ELEVEN POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they 
had reached one of the great turning-points in the world's 
history. There was no longer any doubt that all the 
civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted 
by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in 
language, in traditions, would now be directed by the 
will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, 
by the predominance of a common language. 

[Leaded] 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet 
a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far 
East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West 
would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with 
all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of 
Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome 
of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander 
ASPIRED TO BE HIS SOLE SUCCESSOR, HOPING 

TO COMPLETE HIS WORK AND REGEN- 1234567890 

erate the distracted world by the potent 1234567890 

AEIOU AEIOtr AEIOU AEIOTJ AEIOU AEIOU CN HST A 

aeioii aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou. aeiou 5 n dhst 
aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aewu f f 
HST A dhst 



152 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MONOTYPE 

TWELVE POINT NO. THIRTY-ONE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 
fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt 
that they had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There was no longer 
any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at 
variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts 
in population, in government, in language, in tradi- 
tions, would now be directed by the will of one 
people, by the influence of one system of law, by the 
predominance of a common language. 

[Leaded] 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect 
had been held forth to the world. When Alexander 
was yet a young man, returning from his conquests 
in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very 
near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the 
conquest of the West would have been no difficult 
matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with 
YOUNGER AND FEEBLER REPUBLIC. AND 

IF THE REALIZATION OF THE 1234567890 

conqueror's dreams was hin- 1234567890 

AEIOU AEIOU" AEIOU AEIOU AElOU AEIOU C N f 

aeioii aeiou aeiou aeiou. aeiou aeiou g fi f $ 
aeiou aeiou aewu aeiou aeiou aeiou dknhhhsst 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 153 



MONOTYPE 

SIX POINT NO. FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all 
the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason 
of contrasts in population, in government, in language, in traditions, 
would now be directed by the will of one people, by the influence of one 
system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held 
forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning 
from his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very 
near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West 
would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources 
of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, 
against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite 
conquests, show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with 
his giant genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. 
And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early 
death, most of the early Diadocni had each for many hard-fought years 
aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate 
the distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

[Leaded] 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Medi- 
terranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its 
natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought 
spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. But 
while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously had failed, 
who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, 
by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, into the hands of a 
people who attained it, not by the direction of an Alexander, but by such 
national qualities as had gained for Sparta precedence and respect, coupled 
with aggressive wars under the guise of securing ever-widening frontiers, 
such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Macedonia ? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of hah" a 
century might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most 
of the Stoics, an optimist or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest 
gain of a great peace throughout the world, of the real settlement of 
disputes by the arbitration of an umpire with power to enforce his will; 
there was the consequent development of wide commerce, with its diffusion, 
not only of wealth, but of enlightenment. These material gains were 
indisputable, even though a dangerous monopoly was being established, 
NOT MERELY THROUGH ENORMOUS ADVANTAGES INSEPARA- 
BLE FROM ROMAN INFLUENCE, BUT BY THE JEALOUS 1234567890 
destruction of all those commercial centers which 1X3^567890 

aeiou aeiofl aeioQ aeiofl aeiou a6I6fl c an u a 

aeiou Aeldit aeiou deioii deiou ddou f d d 



154 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



MONOTYPE 

SEVEN POINT NO. EIGHT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the 
great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer any 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in language, 
in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by the 
influence of one system of law, by the predominance of a common 
language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth 
to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from 
his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, 
an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West would 
have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of 
Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, 
against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite 
conquests, show what would have been the successes of Alexander, 
with his giant genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler 
republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered 
by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard- 
fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his 

[Leaded] 

work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of 
Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South 
as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long- 
sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. 
But while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously had 
failed, who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, 
unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, into the 
hands of a people who attained it, not by the direction of an Alexander, 
but by such national qualities as had gained for Sparta precedence and 
respect, coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of securing ever- 
widening frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's 
Macedonia ? 
OF THE STOICS. AN OPTIMIST OR A FATALIST. THERE 

WAS, NO DOUBT, THE MANIFEST GAIN OF A GREAT 1234567890 

peace throughout the world, of the real settlement of 123^561890 

ae!5Q aeK6& a&iou aeldfr aei6u aeioii c a n 6 
aeiou dttdu detdti aeldii deldu aeioii c a fl d 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 155 

MONOTYPE 

EIGHT POINT NO. EIGHT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of 
the great turning-points in the world's history. There was no 
longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, 
or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in govern- 
ment, in language, in tradition, would now be directed by the will 
of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held 
forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, return- 
ing from his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, 
as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest 
of the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with 
all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, 
with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, 
fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been the 
successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the 

[Leaded] 

conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of the 
early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be 
his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the 
distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid 
South as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for 
the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very 
wild imagination. But while those that had conceived it and striven 
for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it 
IT, NOT BY THE DIRECTION OF AN ALEXANDER, BUT 

BY SUCH NATIONAL QUALITIES AS HAD GAINED 1234567890 

for Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with 1234567890 

aelou aeiou ae!6u ae"i6ti aelou c. a n 6 
aewil detail aeldu deidu aelou c. a n o 
aeiQ.ura&eIEHKHSdhkstsh6S& 



156 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MONOTYPE 

NINE POINT NO. EIGHT 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Car- 
thage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached 
one of the great turning-points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto 
at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in 
population, in government, in language, in tradition, would 
now be directed by the will of one people, by the influence of 
one system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young 
man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must 
have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of 
Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no 
difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 

[Leaded] 

under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, 
against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her 
Samnite conquests, show what would have been the successes 
of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the 
younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the 
conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of 
the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired 
to be his whole successor, hoping to complete his work and 
regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of 
Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about 
the Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the 
OF AN ALEXANDER, BUT BY SUCH NATIONAL QUAL- 

ITIES AS HAD GAINED FOR SPARTA PRECE- 1234567890 

dence and respect, coupled with aggressive 1 234567890 

aeiou aei6u a616u de^u aelou aelSti c. a n 6 a 
aelou aeioti aei&ii deiou aelou aelou $ an o 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 157 

MONOTYPE 

ELEVEN POINT NO. EIGHT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they 
had reached one of the great turning-points in the world's 
history. There was no longer any doubt that all the 
civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in govern- 
ment, in language, in traditions, would now be directed 
by the will of one people, by the influence of one system 
of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet 
a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far 

[Leaded] 

East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West 
would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with 
all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes 
of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome 
of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, 
with his giant genius and armaments, against the younger 
and feebler republic. And if the realization of the con- 
QUEROR'S DREAMS WAS HINDERED BY HIS 

EARLY DEATH, MOST OF THE EARLY 1234567890 

Diadochi had each for many hard- 1234567890 

ae'iou aeiou aeiou deioii aeiou aeiSu a 6 a 9 n 
aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou Q z a and 



MONOTYPE 

SIX POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, 
they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning-points in the 
world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations 
hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in 
government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one 
people, by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance of a common 
language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to the 
world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his conquests in 
the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that 
of Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no difficult matter to 
Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, 
with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Sam- 
nite conquests, show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his 
giant genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. And if 
the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of 

[Leaded] 

the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole 
successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted world by the 
potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediterranean 
Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural limits, ex- 
changing the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was 
therefore no very wild imagination. But while those that had conceived it and 
striven for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it should drop 
almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, 
into the hands of a people who attained it, not by the direction of an Alexander, 
but by such national qualities as had gained for Sparta precedence and respect, 
coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of securing ever-widening frontiers, 
such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Macedonia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a century 
might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most of the Stoics, an 
optimist or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest gain of a great peace 
throughout the world, of the real settlement of disputes by the arbitration of an 
umpire with power to enforce his will; there was the consequent development of 
wide commerce with its diffusion, not only of wealth, but of enlightenment. These 
material gains were indisputable, even though a dangerous monopoly was being 
established, not merely through the enormous advantages inseparable from 
Roman influence, but by the jealous destruction of all those commercial centers 
which might have rivaled Rome by reason of favored situation or old traditions 
of trade. 

BUT FAR MORE SERIOUS WAS THE PATENT FACT, THAT NEI 

1234567890 

aeioii aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou c 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



159 



MONOTYPE 

SEVEN POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks Kke Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and 
of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great 
turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt 
that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by 
reason of contrasts in population, in government, in language, in traditions, 
would now be directed by the will of one people, by the influence of one 
system of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth 
to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from 
his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, 
an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West would 
have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against 
the adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant 
genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. And 
if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early 

[Leaded] 

death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years 
aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regen- 
erate the distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Medi- 
terranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its 
natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought 
spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. 
But while those that had conceived it and striven for it consciously had 
failed, who could have imagined that it should drop almost suddenly, 
unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, into the 
hands of a people who attained it, not by the direction of an Alexander, 
but by such national qualities as had gained for Sparta precedence and 
respect, coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of securing ever- 
widening frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's 
Macedonia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a 
century might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most 
of the Stoics, an optimist or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest 
gain of a great peace throughout the world, of the real settlement of 
disputes by the arbitration of an umpire with power 1234567890 
TO ENFORCE HIS WILL; THERE WAS THE CONSEQUENT DE- 

aeioii aeiou aeidu aeidu aeiou aelou c 



160 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MONOTYPE 

EIGHT POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the 
great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer any 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, hi 
language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one 
people, by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance 
of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held 
forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, return- 
ing from his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as 
very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest 
of the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with 
all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, 
with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, 
fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been the 
successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the 

[Leaded] 

conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of the 
early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be his 
sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the 
distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid 
South as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the 
long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild 
imagination. But while those that had conceived it and striven for 
it consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it should 
drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but 
of circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained it, not by 
the direction of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had 
gained for Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive 
wars under the guise of securing ever- 1234567890 

OF WEALTH, BUT OF ENLIGHTENMENT. THESE MATERIAL 

a'eibii aeiou aeidu aeidu aeiou aeiou c 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 161 

MONOTYPE 

NINE POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had 
reached one of the great turning-points in the world's history. 
There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations 
hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, in government, in language, in tradi- 
tions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by 
the influence of one system of law, by the predominance of 
a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young 
man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must 
have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of 
Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no 
difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small 

[Leaded] 

army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh 
from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been 
the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and arma- 
ments, against the younger and feebler republic. And if 
the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered 
by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for 
many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, 
hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted 
world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations 
about the Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North 
and the torrid South as its natural limits, 1234567890 
EXCHANGING THE VIRGIN ORES OF SPAIN FOR THE 



aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou c 



162 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MONOTYPE 

TEN POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had 
reached one of the great turning-points in the world's history. 
There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized nations 
hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, in government, in language, in tradi- 
tions, would now be directed by the will of one people, by 
the influence of one system of law, by the predominance of 
a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been 
held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young 
man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, men must 
have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that of 
Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no 
difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small 

[Leaded] 

army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh 
from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been 
the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and arma- 
ments, against the younger and feebler republic. And if 
the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered 
by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for 
many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, 
hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted 
world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the 1234567890 
LANDS AND NATIONS ABOUT THE MEDITER- 

aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou c 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 163 

MONOTYPE 

ELEVEN POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 
fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt 
that they had reached one of the great turning-points 
in the world's history. There was no longer any 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at vari- 
ance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts 
in population, in government, in language, in tradi- 
tions, would now be directed by the will of one people, 
by the influence of one system of law, by the predom- 
inance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was 

[Leaded] 

yet a young man, returning from his conquests in the 
Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, 
an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest 
of the West would have been no difficult matter to 
Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his 
hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small 
army, against the adult Rome of the third century, 
fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would 
have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant 
genius and armaments, against the younger and 
feebler republic. And if the realization of the con- 
queror's dreams was hindered by 1234567890 
ALL THE LAND AND NATIONS ABOUT THE 

aeib'ii aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou c. 



1 64 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
MONOTYPE 

TWELVE POINT GUSHING NO. TWENTY-FIVE (ll PT. FACE) 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 
fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have 
felt that they had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There was no longer 
any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at 
variance, or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, in government, in language, in 
traditions, would now be directed by the will of 
one people, by the influence of one system of law, 
by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect 
had been held forth to the world. When Alexander 
was yet a young man, returning from his conquests 
in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as 

[Leaded] 

very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome, for 
the conquest of the West would have been no dif- 
ficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of 
Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, 
with his small army, against the adult Rome of the 
third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alex- 
ander, with his giant genius and armaments, 
AGAINST THE YOUNGER AND FEEB jE(E 
1234567890 1234567890 AAA E 66 U C N C 
aeioii aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou aeiou cfiyy aeoe 
(12 pt. face) faieiu sh 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 165 

MONOTYPE 

TEN POINT SCOTCH ROMAN NO. THIRTY-SIX 

WHEN THOUGHTFUL GREEKS LIKE POLYBIUS S 
1234567890 



TWELVE POINT CASLON NO. THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVEN 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 
fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt 
that they had reached one of the great turning- 
1234567890 & $ 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall 
1234567890 JE (E <z oe &$ 

U \ / A " V \ / A / A u _ \ / A 

aaaaaa eeeeee ill oooooo 
adadaaa eee 'iii 
aaaoensths tsrh 



EIGHT POINT ITALIC NO. TWENTY-FIVE K 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of 
the great turning-points in the world's history. There was no lon- 
$ 1234567890 JE <E x 02 & 

TEN POINT ITALIC NO. TWENTY-FIVE K 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had 

$ 1234567890 JE (E a? 02 & 
Ten Point also cast on Eleven-Point Body 

TWELVE POINT ITALIC NO. TWENTY-FIVE K 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 
fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have 
$ 1234567890 M (E a? 02 & 



1 66 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CASLON OLD STYLE 

EIGHT POINT 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning-points 
in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in popula- 
tion, in government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will 
of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance of a 
common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to the 
world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his conquests in 
the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike that 
of Rome; for the conquest of the West would have been no difficult matter to 
Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of 
Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh 
from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been the successes of Alex- 
ander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the younger and feebler repub- 

[Leaded] 

lie. And i f the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early 
death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to 
be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted 
world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediterranean 
Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural limits, 
exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, 
was therefore no very wild imagination. But while those that had conceived it and 
striven for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it should drop 
almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but of circumstances, 
into the hands of a people who attained it, not by the direction of an Alexander, 
but by such national qualities as had gained for Sparta precedence and respect, 
coupled with aggressive wars under the guise of securing ever-widening frontiers, 
such as those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Macedonia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a century 
might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most of the Stoics, 
an optimist or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest gain of a great 
PEACE THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, OF THE REAL SETTLE- 
MENT OF DISPUTES BY THE ARBITRATION OF AN 1234567890 

umpire with power to enforce his <will; there 1234567890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 167 

CASLON OLD STYLE 

TEN POINT 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
;nd of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the 
great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer 
any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at 
war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, 
in language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of 
one people, by the influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held 
forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, return- 
ing from his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, 
as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest 
of the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, 
with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of 

[Leaded] 

Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third 
century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have 
been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and arma- 
ments, against the younger and feebler republic. And if the reali- 
zation of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by his early death, 
most of the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years as- 
pired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work and 
regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic 
culture. 

A world- empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid 
South as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for 
THE LONG-SOUGHT SPICES OF ARABY THE BLEST, 

WAS THEREFORE NO WILD IMAGINATION. I 234567890 

But while those that had conceived it 1234567890 



1 68 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CASLON OLD STYLE 

TWELVE POINT 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 
fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt 
that they had reached one of the great turning-points 
in the world's history. There was no longer any 
doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at vari- 
ance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts in 
population, in government, in language, in traditions, 
would now be directed by the will of one people, 
by the influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

[Leaded] 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect 
had been held forth to the world. When Alexander 
was yet a young man, returning from his conquests 
in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very 
near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the 
conquest of the West would have been no difficult 
matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia 
under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with 
his small army, against the adult Rome of the third 
century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show 
what would have been the successes of Alexander, 
WITH HIS GIANT GENIUS AND ARMA- 
MENTS, AGAINST THE YOUNGER 1234567890 

and feebler republic. And if 1234.567890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 169 

CASLON OLD STYLE 

FOURTEEN POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 
the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must 
have felt that they had reached one of the great 
turning-points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in 
government, in language, in traditions, would 

[Leaded] 

now be directed by the will of one people, by 
the influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand 
prospect had been held forth to the world. 
When Alexander was yet a young man, return- 
ing from his conquests in the Far East, men 
must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of 
the West would have been no difficult matter 
TO ALEXANDER, WITH ALL THE 

RESOURCES OF AsiA I 234567890 

under his hand. This 1234567890 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



SCOTCH ROMAN 



[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all the civil- 
ized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of contrasts 
in population, in government, in language, in traditions, would now be directed 
by the will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by the predomi- 
nance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth to 
the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his con- 
quests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not 
unlike that of Rome ; for the conquests of the West would have been no diffi- 
cult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The 
successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third 
century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been the 
successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the 
younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams 
was hindered by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for many 
hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete his work 
and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic 
culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediter- 
ranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural 
limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby 
the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. But while those that had 
conceived it and striven for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined 
that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, 

[Leaded] 

but of circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained it, not by the 
direction of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had gained for 
Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive wars under the guise 
of securing ever-widening frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid strides 
of Philip's Macedonia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a century 
might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most of the Stoics, 
an optimist or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest gain of a great 
peace throughout the world, of the real settlement of disputes by the arbitra- 
tion of an umpire with power to enforce his will; there was the consequent 
development of wide commerce, with its diffusion not only of wealth, but of 
enlightenment. These material gains were indisputable, even though a danger- 
ous monopoly was being established, not merely through the enormous advan- 
tages inseparable from Roman influence, but by the jealous destruction of all 
those commercial centers which might have rivaled Rome by reason of favored 
situation or old traditions of trade. 

But far more serious was the patent fact, that neither the Roman people 
NOR THEIR RULERS HAD RECEIVED ANY EDUCATION TO FIT THEM 

FOR AN IMPERIAL POLICY, MATERIAL PLEASURES, AND THE 1284567890 

dominant classes, when vast opportunities of wealth 1SS3U567890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 171 

SCOTCH ROMAN 

EIGHT POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the 
great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer 
any doubt that all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, 
distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, in 
language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one 
people, by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance 
of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held 
forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, return- 
ing from his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, 
as very near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of 
the West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all 
the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with 
his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh 
from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been the suc- 
cesses of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. 

[Leaded] 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid 
South as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for 
the long-sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very 
wild imagination. But while those that had conceived it and striven 
for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it should 
drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, but 
of circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained it, not by 
the direction of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had 
gained for Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive 
wars under the guise of securing ever-widening frontiers, such as 
those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Macedonia? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half 
a century might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like 
HENCE IT RESULTED THAT THE COMMON PEOPLE 

DEGENERATED RAPIDLY IXTO A VULGAR MOB 1234567890 

pursuing solely its material pleasures, and the 1234567890 



172 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

SCOTCH ROMAN 

TEN POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had 
reached one of the great turning-points in the world's his- 
tory. There was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason 
of contrasts in population, in government, in language, in 
traditions, would now be directed by the will of one people, 
by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance 
of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet a 
young man, returning from his conquests in the Far East, 
men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire not 
unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the West would 

[Leaded] 

have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the 
resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, 
with his small army, against the adult Rome of the third 
century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would 
have been the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius 
and armaments, against the younger and feebler republic. 
And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered 
by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for 
many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, 
hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted 
world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire including all the lands and nations about 
MEDITERRANEAN SEA, REACHING THE FROZEN 
NORTH AND THE TORRID SOUTH AS 1234567890 

natural limits, exchanging the virgin l^SJf.561890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE i?3 

SCOTCH ROMAN 

ELEVEN POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that they 
had reached one of the great turning-points in the world's 
history. There was no longer any doubt that all the 
civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in govern- 
ment, in language, in traditions, would now be directed 
by the will of one people, by the influence of one system 
of law, by the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet 
a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far 

[Leaded] 

East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome ; for the conquest of the West 
would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with 
all the resources of Asia under his hand. The successes 
of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome 
of the third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, 
show what would have been the successes of Alexander, 
with his giant genius and armaments, against the younger 
and feebler republic. And if the realization of the con- 
queror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of 
the early Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years 
ASPIRED TO BE HIS SOLE SUCCESSOR, HOP- 
ING TO COMPLETE HIS WORK AND 1234567890 

regenerate the distracted world by 123J^567890 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



SCOTCH ROMAN 

TWELVE POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 
the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must 
have felt that they had reached one of the great 
turning-points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in 
government, in language, in traditions, would 
now be directed by the will of one people, by the 
influence of one system of law, by the predomi- 
nance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand pros- 
pect had been held forth to the world. When 

[Leaded] 

Alexander was yet a young man, returning from 
his conquests in the Far East, men must have 
anticipated, as very near, an empire not unlike 
that of Rome; for the conquest of the West 
would have been no difficult matter to Alex- 
ander, with all the resources of Asia under 
his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his 
small army, against the adult Rome of the third 
century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show 
THE YOUNGER AND FEEBLER RE- 
PUBLIC. AND IF THE REALIZA- 1234567890 

tion of the conqueror's dreams 1234567890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 175 

SCOTCH ROMAN 

FOURTEEN POINT 
[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polyb- 
ius saw the fall of Carthage and of Cor- 
inth, they must have felt that they had 
reached one of the great turning-points 
in the world's history. There was no 
longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, 
distracted by reason of contrasts in pop- 
ulation, in government, in language, in 
traditions, would now be directed by the 
will of one people, by the influence of 

[Leaded] 

one system of law, by the predominance 
of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this 
grand prospect had been held forth to 
the world. When Alexander was yet a 
young man, returning from his con- 
quest in the Far East, men must have 
anticipated, as very near, an empire not 
MATTER TO ALEXANDER, WIT 
1234567890 all the resour 1234567890 



i 7 6 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



BOOKMAN OLD STYLE 



[Solid] 

'When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 
Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the great turning- 
points in the world's history. There was no longer any doubt that all the 
civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, distracted by reason of con- 
trasts in population, in government, in language, in traditions, would now be 
directed by the will of one people, by the influence of one system of law, by 
the predominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had been held forth 
to the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from his 
conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome; for the conquests of the 'West would have been no 
difficult matter to Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under his hand. 
The successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the adult Rome of the 
third century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been 
the successes of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against the 
younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the conqueror's dreams 
was hindered by his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each for 
many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole successor, hoping to complete 
his work and regenerate the distracted world by the potent influence of 
Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the Mediter- 
ranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South as its natural 
limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long-sought spices of Araby 
the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagination. But while those that had 
conceived it and striven for it consciously had failed, who could have imagined 
that it should drop almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genius, 

[Leaded] 

but of circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained it, not by the 
direction of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had gained for 
Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive wars under the guise 
of securing ever-widening frontiers, such as those which mark the rapid 
strides of Philip's Macedonia ? 

Any political thinker who witnessed this mighty outcome of half a century 
might indeed feel uneasy at the result, if he were not, like most of the Stoics t 
an optimist or a fatalist. There was, no doubt, the manifest gain of a great 
peace throughout the world, of the real settlement of disputes by the arbitra- 
tion of an umpire with power to enforce his will ; there was the consequent 
development of wide commerce, with its diffusion, not only of wealth, but of 
enlightenment. These material gains were indisputable, even though a dan- 
gerous monopoly was being established, not merely through the enormous 
advantages inseparable from Roman influence, but by the jealous destruction 
of all those commercial centers which might have rivaled Rome by reason of 
favored situation or old traditions of trade. 

But far more serious was the patent fact, that neither the Roman people 
nor their rulers had received any education to fit them for an imperial policy, 
MATERIAL PLEASURES, AND THE DOMINANT CLASSES, WHEN VAST 
<A eTVl RJ y r &; tf 1234567890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 177 

BOOKMAN OLD STYLE 

EIGHT POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 
and of Corinth, they must have felt that they had reached one of the 
great turning-points in the world's history. There was no longer 
any doubt that all the civilized nations, hitherto at variance, or at 
war, distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in government, 
in language, in traditions, would now be directed by the will of one 
people, by the influence of one system of law, by the predominance 
of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this prospect had been held forth to 
the world. When Alexander was yet a young man, returning from 
his conquests in the Far East, men must have anticipated, as very 
near, an empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the 
West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, with all the 
resources of Asia under his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with 
his small army, against the adult Rome of the third century, fresh 
from her Samnite conquests, show what would have been the suc- 
cesses of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, against 
the younger and feebler republic. And if the realization of the con- 
queror's dreams was hindered by his early death, most of the early 
Diadochi had each for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole 

[Leaded] 

successor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the distracted 
world by the potent influence of Hellenistic culture. 

A world-empire, including all the lands and nations about the 
Mediterranean Sea, reaching to the frozen North and the torrid South 
as its natural limits, exchanging the virgin ores of Spain for the long- 
sought spices of Araby the Blest, was therefore no very wild imagi- 
nation. But while those that had conceived it and striven for it 
consciously had failed, who could have imagined that it should drop 
almost suddenly, unexpectedly, by the force, not of genins, but of 
circumstances, into the hands of a people who attained it, not by the 
directions of an Alexander, but by such national qualities as had 
gained for Sparta precedence and respect, coupled with aggressive 
wars under the guise of securing ever-widening frontiers, such as 
those which mark the rapid strides of Philip's Macedonia? 
THE MANIFEST GAIN OF A GREAT PEACE THROUGHO 
cA oM Rj r y tJfe tf 1234567890 



178 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
BOOKMAN OLD STYLE 

TEN POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall 
of Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that 
they had reached one of the great turning-points in the 
world's history. There was no longer any doubt that 
all the civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, 
distracted by reason of contrasts in population, in gov- 
ernment, in language, in traditions, would now be di- 
rected by the will of one people, by the influence of one 
system of law, by the predominance of a common lan- 
guage. 

It was not the first time that this grand prospect had 
been held forth to the world. When Alexander was yet 
a young man, returning from his conquests in the Far 
East, men must have anticipated, as very near, an 
empire not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the 
West would have been no difficult matter to Alexander, 

[Leaded] 

with all the resources of Asia under his hand. The 
successes of Pyrrhus, with his small army, against the 
adult Rome of the third century, fresh from her Samnite 
conquests, show what would have been the successes 
of Alexander, with his giant genius and armaments, 
against the younger and feebler republic. And if the 
realization of the conqueror's dreams was hindered by 
his early death, most of the early Diadochi had each 
for many hard-fought years aspired to be his sole suc- 
cessor, hoping to complete his work and regenerate the 
distracted world by the potent influence of Hellenistic 
NORTH AND THE TORRID SOUTH AS ITS NAT- 
o r r 1& & 1234567890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



179 



BOOKMAN OLD STYLE 

TWELVE POINT 

[Solid] 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 
the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must 
have felt that they had reached one of the great 
turning-points in the world's history. There 
was no longer any doubt that all the civilized 
nations hitherto at variance, or at war, dis- 
tracted by reason of contrasts in population, in 
government, in language, -in traditions, would 
now be directed by the will of one people, by 
the influence of one system of law, by the pre- 
dominance of a common language. 

It was not the first time that this grand 
prospect had been held forth to the world. 

[Leaded] 

"When Alexander was yet a young man, return- 
ing from his conquests in the Far East, men 
must have anticipated, as very near, an empire 
not unlike that of Rome; for the conquest of the 
West would have been no difficult matter to 
Alexander, with all the resources of Asia under 
his hand. The successes of Pyrrhus, with his 
small army, against the adult Rome of the third 
century, fresh from her Samnite conquests, show 
AGAINST THE YOUNGER AND FEEB 
cTVl Rj> r y* ^e tf 1234567890 



i8o THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



PORSON GREEK 

SIX POINT 

Ta.Se Si pot irdvriat, <fj, Kpoicre, Aef oy ir<o airoj3e'/3i)Kc ra <K rov iv AeA^cus \prj. 
OTijpi'ov <roi yap iij Aeyerai iravv ye TC0epa7reva p dat 6 'AiroAAau 1 Kai <7( irdvTo. tKtivtf 
vti.96fi.tvov irpaTTiv. 'EBouAopuji' aV, & KGpe, OVTUS x ell/ ' > '^ 1 ' ^< iravra TavafTi'a 
v0i> ({ ap\rj? TrpaTTui' irpo<nrivi\Br\v Tto 'ATrdAAwi'i. Ilai? 8; e0Tj 6 KOpo; 8ii5a<r<te 
iracv yap iropaiofa. Aeyeis. 'On n-piroi' ftev, e^>j, a/ueA^aa?, ipiarav rov 6ebv tl TI iSto- 
(tT)v, a.irtitti.pia/J.riv avrov el Svvaaro aAr)9ciieu'. 

EIGHT POINT 

Tdoe 5^ ^toi irdvrws, ?077, Kpoi<re, X^ov TTWS diro/3t(3i)KC rd ^K roO ^v 



Ka.1 trc irdvra tKelvy irei66/jivov irpdrreiv. ''Epov\6fj.riv &v, & K0/>e, 
fw vvv Si vdvra r&vavria 



TEN POINT (ON NINE- OR TEN-POINT BODY) 

TaSe 8 fJMt TravTtos, e^rj, Kpoiae, A.eov TTWS aTroySe^xc TO, ex 
TOV ev AcX^>ots Xpya'T-rjpiov croi yap S^ Xeycrai 7ra^ yc re&pa- 
6 'ATToAAwi/ KCU o-e Travra cKctvu 7ret^o/u,i/ov vparruv- 
d/iTjv av, a) Krpe, OVTO>S X CIV ' ^^ ^* iraj/ra rdvavrta c C 



ELEVEN POINT 



TaSe 8e fiot Travrays, <j>rj, Kpotcre, \eov TTW? a 
ra etc rov ev Ae\^>ot? %pr)0'rrjpiov' crol yap Brj \eyerat rrdvv 
ye reOeparceva'daL 6 'ATro'XXwi' Kai <re rrdvra eiceivcp i c <7 



TWELVE POINT 



TaSe 8e jtiot Travrw?, 6^)17, Kpoicre, \eov TTW? d-Tro- 
jSefirfKe TO, e/c TOV ei/ AeX^>ots -^prjcrTTjpiov crol yap 
or) Xeyerat Trai/v ye reOepairevo-OaL 6 'ATroXXwv /cat 
MONOTYPE 

ELEVEN POINT MONOTYPE 

TASe Se juot Travrcos, ^>T;, Kpottre, Xe^oj/ TTCOS a.iro@(3r]K6 
TO. IK rov iv AeX<ots xP r ) a " J "np' l - ov ' <roi yap 8rj Xeycrat Travv 
ye redepairevffdai, 6 'AroXXcoi' Kai ere Trd^ra eKelvu Trei.d6fj.evov 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 181 

ANTIQUE GREEK 

EIGHT POINT 

TdSe 8e p.oi irdvrws, ({>r], Kpotcre, Xlov TTUS d-n-opepT|K rd 6K rov 
cv AcX<|>ois XP T 1 " TT 1P^ OV ' " ' 1 "Y*P STJ Xe*ytTai irdw -ye TcOcpatrcvcrOai 6 
*Air6XXv Ka <rt iravra KeCvw iri66|j.{vov irpd-rmv. 'Epov\6[jLT)v av, w 
Kvpc, OVTWS Xiv vvv 8 irdvTa rdvavrCa cvOvs 4^ *PX''l s irpdrraiv irpoar- 
U 'A-rroXXuvi. IIws S J c(|>i) 6 Kvpos 8(Sa<rK* irdw -yap 



ELEVEN POINT 

TdSe 8e |ioi iravros, <J>ii, Kpoiae, Xcj-ov TTWS dirope 
rd K TOV ev AeX4>o Is XP 1 ! " 7 " 1 !?^ 011 ' "^ "Y-P ^ 
irdvi) -ye TeBcpaTrcvorOai 6 ' AirdXXwv KCU <r irdvra Ktvco 
iri06|JLVov irpaTTiv. 'Epov\6|XT|v av, S Kvpc, OUTCDS 



INSCRIPTION GREEK 



QPAMMATEY^ANTAKAITHC<t>IAO^EBA^TOY 
HEBREW 



nnb :D"n$fli uistJia^ pns bsten IIDTO nnpb :nrn ^ 
TihjT n^b DDT-I osn y^TC"! : n^Ttti n?ji i?bb' ngny o^n 



NINE POINT 

nb'E Trr-p rtabis *buj 



T I" 



ctia nnpb jnra ^^^ rh 

j- '-** rr ' ft' I T 

owsb nnb : 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
NESTORIAN SYRIAC 

NINE POINT 



_ 

I - 1 * ' I'f-^J-v. n j-llc] "" ^ i " i- 
_ *- 

^I^^ g] ^VslV^O .O3t-^ '1 " I . 1^ V^V'-i . 

. ^ X. ' \ ^ 



.]")) ^ \ 

P. 
-; ( V"<a j Ti * 



ARABIC 

NINE POINT 



-- 

r 

wo ^ JutftJI UoU JL4-cio xal 



ETHIOPIC 

NINE POINT 



07-C : 

^ft : 

t : ft"7.f t : nlA : Xmft-drkC : -00-^1 : XA : 

ft : hC 
: X1H : 



C : iD-Xf : W : rt-OX ; h<n> ; 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 183 



MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS 

SIX POINT 

X-* <* + -& 

EIGHT POINT 

:::-H-<AD^v'#' ? ' 

NINE POINT 



:: -: Z Z* - / / || | X 



ELEVEN POINT 



rrb n> q / 

SEVEN POINT 
FIVE POINT = + -1- X " ' " # TWELVE POINT 

= + - 



/ 



Jj 



CANCELED LETTERS AND FIGURES 

EIGHT POINT 



1 84 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 

MONOTYPE MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS 

Six Point 
+ -X + -< ?!? /'*ttH%iJIJIJ 

o e e e s N 

Seven Point 
+ - X + - * > 

Eight Point 

Z^AA||DO^^<> = ^^/' 
+ _ x .. = o, ? , , < .c /% * tt | t 



Nine Point 
Z*^*A*A*||OO^ <*>* = ^^=/-^*^*~ <*> 

+ -x- = 0/ ?.'f|/%*t1:1fHitfHi 
tP)<> 41? 1 ?? 1 ! 1 

* 8 point on Q point. 

Ten Point 



Eleven Point 

+ ._ x ^ = 0/ ?^' C3 |/*t1:1l%HitfH^ 

3./" dhmsmgM <^ ^ 

Twelve Point 

+-x = -- / 0/ *tt1 ilUiflJH 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



185 



MONOTYPE SUPERIOR AND INFERIOR 

LETTERS AND FIGURES 

OLD STYLE 



Six Point 



Seven Point 

1134567890 , 34 

Eight Point 

abed ef ghi j k 1 m no p q r e t u T w x y I 1234 
1234567890 

Nine Point 

abode fghi j k 1 m n o p q r 8 tu vwxyi 1234567890 

1334567890 

Ten Point 

abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvw ab c d e f ghi j k I mn o p q f i t u ,w 

xyz abcdefghijklmnopqrs 

tvvwxyz 123456-890 

Eleven Point 
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuv 

w x y 1234567890 



MODERN 



SUPERIOR 

Six Point 

1234S8-8JO 

Seven Point 
Eight Point 

12345678,0 

Nine Point 

1234567890 

Eleven Point 
1*34567890 



123466 7S90 



1234567890 



Ten Point 

SUPERIOR 
1234567890 +-X-i- = -(] 

INFERIOR 
abcdefghijklmnopqrs 

* V * 123486789( 

=<> ;: " 



t u v w 



1 86 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CASLON OLD STYLE 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 



TWENTY-TWO POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 




THIRTY POINT 




THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thoug 7890 
THE FIRST TIM 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 187 



CASLON OLD STYLE 

FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When th 1234 
THEFIRST 



CASLON OLD STYLE ITALIC 

EIGHTEEN POINT 



If^hen thoughtful Greeks like Pol 1 234. 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 



TWENTY-TWO POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks like 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 9012 
THE FIRST TIME THA 



THIRTY POINT 




1 88 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
NO. 8 OLD STYLE 

TWENTY-TWO POINT 

When thoughtful Gre 1234 
THE FIRST TIME TH 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful 5678 
THE FIRST TIME 



THIRTY-TWO POINT 



When thoug 9012 
THE FIRST TIM 



FORTY-FOUR POINT 



When th 345 
THE FIRST 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 189 



NO. 8 OLD STYLE ITALIC 

TWENTY-TWO POINT 




TWENTY-FOUR POINT 




THIRTY-TWO POINT 





thou go 1 2 
FIRST T 



FORTY-FOUR POINT 




When 
THE FIRST 

ELZEVIR ITALIC 

TEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE ^ T) IM 5^ ^ 12345 



1 90 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CONDENSED OLD STYLE 

EIGHT POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD 12345 

NINE POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT H 67890 

TEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROS 12345 

TWELVE POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE G 67890 

SIXTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE G 1234 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT T 5678 

TWENTY POINT 

THE FIRST TIME T 9012 

TWENTY-TWO POINT 

THE FIRST TIME T 3456 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

THE FIRST TIM 7890 

TWENTY-EIGHT POINT 

THE FIRST TI 1234 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 191 



CONDENSED OLD STYLE 

THIRTY-TWO POINT 



THE FIRST 5678 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



THE FIRS 9012 



FORTY POINT 



THE FIR 3456 



EXTENDED OLD STYLE 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thought 123 
THE FIRST TIME 



THIRTY-TWO POINT 



When tho 45 
THE FIRST I 



1 92 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



EXTENDED OLD STYLE 

FORTY-EIGHT POINT 




THE FIR 



FRENCH OLD STYLE 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth 12345 
WHEN THOUGHTFUL GREEKS LIKE POLYBIUS SAW THE FALL OF CARTHAGE AND 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH 

SEVEN POINT 

WHEN THOUGHTFUL GREEKS LIKE POLYBIUS SAW THE FALL 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Garth 12345 
WHEN THOUGHTFUL GREEKS LIKE POLYBIUS SAW THE FALL 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD B 

TEN POINT 

WHEN THOUGHTFUL GREEKS LIKE POLYBIUS SAW 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 

TWELVE POINT 

WHEN THOUGHTFUL GREEKS LIKE POLY 12345- 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 193 



FRENCH OLD STYLE 

FOURTEEN POINT 



THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 67890 

SIXTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 1234 

TWENTY POINT 

THE FIRST TIME T 5678 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

THE FIRST TIME 901 



THIRTY POINT 



THE FIRST TI 234 

THIRTY-SIX POINT 

THE FIRST 56 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



THE FI 78 



SIXTY POINT 



THE 901 



194 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CHELTENHAM OLD STYLE 



When thoughtful Greek* like Polybiui saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they mu 1 2345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FO 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of C 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEE 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Ca 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPEC 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the f 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PR 

ACCENTED LETTERS SIX TO TWELVE POINT 

AAA 111 660 000 g N 

aaaa eee iiii 6666 u u ft ii 5 n 
CHELTENHAM OLD STYLE ITALIC 

SIX POINT 

W hen thoughtful Greeks like Polubius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BE 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw th 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND P 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 195 

CHELTENHAM OLD STYLE ITALIC 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polyhius 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks like 5678 

THE FIRST TIME THAT T 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Greek 901 

THE FIRST TIME TH 



THIRTY POINT 



When thoughtful 1908 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 




SPECIAL CHARACTERS ALL SIZES 



ACCENTED LETTERS SIX TO TWELVE POINT 

A o u n 

ad a a e e e ill dodo u u u u f n 



196 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CHELTENHAM WIDE 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the (all of Carthage and of Co 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FO 



EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEE 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fa 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPEC 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PR 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polyb 1 234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRA 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks lik 5678 

THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Gr 90 1 2 

THE FIRST TIME THA 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 197 



CHELTENHAM WIDE 

THIRTY POINT 



When thoughtful 345 

THE FIRST TIME T 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When though 678 

THE FIRST TIM 



FORTY-TWO POINT 



When thou 90 

THE FIRST T 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When tho 1 2 

ACCENTED LETTERS SIX TO TWELVE POINT 

AAA EEE III 00 000 Q ft 
aaaa eee ii 666 u u ft ti q n 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHIACGO PRESS 



CHELTENHAM CONDENSED 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the (all of Carthage and of Corinth, they must ha 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE W 



EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corint 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORT 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 1 2345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEE 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT H 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 1 2345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Pol 67890 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRA 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 1 234 

THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 199 

CHELTENHAM BOLD EXTRA CONDENSED 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must hare felt that the 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WORLD. WHEN AL 



EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they most 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WO 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FO 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Cartha 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HE 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fal 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HA 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius s 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 



200 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CHELTENHAM BOLD EXTRA CONDENSED 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks like Po 123 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 



THIRTY POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 1 456 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thoughtful Gr 789 
THE FIRST THE THAT 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 2OI 



CHELTENHAM BOLD CONDENSED 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they must 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE W 



EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Cor 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FOR 



TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Car 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HELD F 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT H 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius sa 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks like P 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRA 



202 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CHELTENHAM BOLD CONDENSED 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT T 



THIRTY POINT 



When thoughtful Gre 567 
THE FIRST TIME THA 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thoughtful 890 
THE FIRST TIME T 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 203 



CHELTENHAM BOLD 



When thoughtful Greek* like Poly bi us saw the fall of Carthage and o 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD F 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of C 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BE 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw t 12345. 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius s 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PR 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Po 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful G 901 
THE FIRST TIME THA 



204 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHELTENHAM BOLD 

THIRTY POINT 

When thoughtf 234 
THE FIRST TIME T 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thoug 567 

THE FIRST TIM 



FORTY-TWO POINT 



When thou 89 

THE FIRST T 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When th 23 
THE FIRST 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 205 



CHELTENHAM BOLD 

SIXTY POINT 



When 14 

THE FIR 



SEVENTY-TWO POINT 




ACCENTED LETTERS SIX TO TWELVE POINT 

AAA EE III 66O 000 C N aaaa eeee ml 6666 uuuii ? n 
CHELTENHAM BOLD CONDENSED 

SEVENTY-TWO POINT 

When 6 



206 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHELTENHAM BOLD CONDENSED 

NINETY-SIX POINT 

Whe7 



ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY POINT 



ThiO 



ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FORTY-FOUR POINT 



Wil 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



CHELTENHAM BOLD CONDENSED 

ONE-HTJNDRED-AND-EIGHTY POINT 





TWO-HtTNDRED-AND-SIXTEEN POINT 




208 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CHELTENHAM BOLD EXTRA CONDENSED 



SEVENTY-TWO POINT 



When 




NINETY-SIX POINT 



Tho96 



ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY POINT 



Gre 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 209 

CHELTENHAM BOLD EXTENDED 

SIX POINT 

'When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 1234S6 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD 

EIGHT POINT 

'When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 6789 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Po 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks lik 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Gree 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful 1234 
THE FIRST TIME TH 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thou 1234 
THE FIRST TIME 



THIRTY POINT 



When tho 567 
THE FIRST TI 



210 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHELTENHAM BOLD ITALIC 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greek* like Polybiut taw the fall of Carthage a 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fatt of C 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BE 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROS 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND P 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like P 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT T 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

When thoughtful 9012 
THE FIRST TIME TH 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 211 

CHELTENHAM BOLD ITALIC 

THIRTY POINT 

When thought 345 
THE FIRST TIME 

THIRTY-SIX POINT 

When thou 678 
THE FIRST TI 

FORTY-TWO POINT 

When tho 90 

THE FIRST 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When th 12 
THE FIRS 

ACCENTED LETTERS SIX TO TWELVE POINT 

Add e i Odd Uuii ft n 



212 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CLARENDON 



When thoughtful Greeks like Folybius saw the fall of Carthage an 12345 
THE FIEST TIME THAT THE GEAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HEL 



NINE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GEAND PEOSPECT HA 

ELEVEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius sa 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 

SEVEN POINT FIGURES 

1234567890 



IONIC 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Car 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD B 



TITLE GOTHIC 

SIX POINT NO. SEVENTY-ONE 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORT 12345 

SIX POINT NO. SEVENTY-TWO 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN 67890 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 213 



DELLA ROBBIA 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they 12345 
THE FIRST TIME .THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN SET FORTH 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN S 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall o 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw th 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PR 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybi 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE G 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks li 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT T 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful G 9012 
THE FIRST TIME TH 



214 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
DELLA ROBBIA 

THIRTY POINT 

When thought 3456 
THE FIRST TIME 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 




THE FIRST TI 



FORTY-TWO POINT 



When tho 123 

THE FIRST I 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When th 45 
THE FIRST 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 215 

GUSHING OLD STYLE 

FOURTEEN POINT NO. ONE 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND P 

FOURTEEN POINT NO. TWO 

When thoughtful Greeks like P 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks 1 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

When thoughtful G 567 
THE FIRST TIME TH 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thoug 890 
THE FIRST TI 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When tho 12 
THE FIRST 



2i6 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CENTURY EXPANDED 

SIX POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HEL 12345 

EIGHT POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 67890 

TEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 12345 

ELEVEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND 67890 

TWELVE POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAN 12345 

FOURTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 1234 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THA 5678 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

THE FIRST TIME 9012 



THE FIRST TI 345 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 217 

GOUDY OLD STYLE 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and ot Corint 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN SET FORT 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Cartha 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BE 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PRO 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Poly 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRA 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

When thoughtful G 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THA 



THIRTY POINT 



When thoughtf 5678 
THE FIRST TIME ? 



2i8 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
GOUDY OLD STYLE 

THIRTY-SIX POINT 

When thou 1234 
THE FIRST TI ? 

FORTY-TWO POINT 

When tho 567 
THE FIRST T 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When th 89 
THE FIRST 



GOUDY OLD STYLE ITALIC 



When thoughtful Qreeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE QRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN SET FORTH 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Qreeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE QRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 219 

GOUDY OLD STYLE ITALIC 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Qreeks like Polybius saw the fall o} 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE QRAND PROSPECT 



TWELVE POINT 



When thoughtful Qreeks like Polybius saw the 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE QRAND PROS 



FOURTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Qreeks like Polybius s 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE QRAN 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Qreeks like 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful Qree 9012 
THE FIRST TIME THA 



THIRTY POINT 



When thoughtful 3456 

THE FIRST TIME T 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thought 789 

THE FIRST TIM 



220 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



GOUDY BOLD 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of C 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN SET F 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Ca 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw th 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSP 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND P 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Po 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT T 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

When thoughtful 9012 
THE FIRST TIME TH 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 221 



GOUDY BOLD 



THIRTY POINT 



When though 3456 
THE FIRST TIME 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thou 789 
THE FIRST TI 



FORTY-TWO POINT 



When tho 123 
THE FIRST I 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When th 45 
THE FIRS 



222 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
PACKARD 

EIGHT POINT 

When tKougKtful Greeks like Polybius saw tke fall of Carthage and of C 12345 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN 

TEN POINT 

WHen tKougKtful Greeks like PolyKius saw tKe fall of Ca 67890 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 

TWELVE POINT 

When tKougKtful Greeks like Polybius saw tKe fall 12345 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROS 

FOURTEEN POINT 

WHen tKougKtful Greeks like Polybius s 67890 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

WKen tKougKtful Greeks like P 11345 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



WKen tKougKtful Greek 67890 

THE FIRST TIME THAT 



THIRTY POINT 



WKen tHougHtful G 

THE FIRST TIME T 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 223 



PACKARD 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



WKen thought 4567 

THE FIRST TIM 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 



When tko 890 

THE FIRST 



SPECIAL CHARACTERS ALL SIZES 







CLOISTER BLACK 



TWELVE POINT 



ttougijrtul <greefe* like $olpfc 1234567890 



224 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



DE VINNE 



SIX POINT 



When thoughtful Qreeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and o 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FO 



EIGHT POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD B 



When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Qreeks like Polyb 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greek 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT T 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful 567 
THE FIRST TIME T 



THIRTY POINT 



When though 890 
THE FIRST TIM 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 225 



DE VINNE 

THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thou 12 
THE FIRST S 



FORTY-TWO POINT 



When th 34 
THE FIRST 



SIXTY POINT 



When 15 
THE FI 



226 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



DE VINNE 



SEVENTY-TWO POINT 



Whei6 
THE F 



SEVENTY-TWO POINT A 




VISE 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 227 



DEVINNE 

NINETY-SIX POINT 



Oh 8 
HIM 



ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY POINT 



Bel 



228 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
DEVINNE CONDENSED 

SEVENTY-TWO POINT 

Whenl 



NINETY-SIX POINT 





ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENIY POINT 



His 3 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 229 



DE VINNE CONDENSED 

ONE-HUNDRED-AND-EIGHTY POINT 





JENSON OLD STYLE ITALIC 

FORTY-EIGHT POINT 




BOLD-FACE ITALIC 



TF7j.cn thoug7itful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Cartha 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN 



NINE POINT 

IVlien thotightful Greeks like Polybius saiv the 6789O 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 



230 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



SCOTCH ROMAN 

EIGHTEEN POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT 

When thoughtful Greeks 123 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



When thoughtful 5678 
THE FIRST TIME T 

When thoughtful Gr 1 



THIRTY POINT 



When thought 901 
THE FIRST TIM 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 



When thou 456 
THE FIRST T 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 231 

SCOTCH ROMAN 

FORTY-EIGHT POINT 

When th 78 

THE FIRS 



SIXTY POINT 



When 90 
THE FI 



SEVENTY-TWO POINT 



Whel2 



232 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



LIGHT-FACE GOTHIC 



When thoughtful Greek* like Polybiu* taw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, they 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HE 

SIX POINT COMBINATION GOTHIC NO. ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THREE 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WORLD 12345 



GOTHIC CONDENSED 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, th 1 2345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO TH 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthag 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HE 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius sa 6789 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like P 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRA 



TWENTY-TWO POINT 



When thoughtful Greeks 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE G 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 233 



COPPERPLATE 

SIX POINT 
NO. ONE 

THC FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WOR 1234* 

NO. TWO 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH 6789O 

NO. THREE 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN H 12345 

NO. FOUR 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 6789O 

TWELVE POINT 
NO. ONE 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PR 12345 

NO. TWO 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 6789O 



WHITTIER 

TWELVE POINT 
NO. THREE 



THE FIRST TIME THAT 12345 

NO. FOUR 

THE FIRST TIME T 6789 



EIGHTEEN POINT 
NO. ONE 



THE FIRST TIM 1234 

NO. TWO 

THE FIRST T 1678 

BLACK GOTHIC 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Carthage and of Corln 67890 



234 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
LINING GOTHIC CONDENSED 

SIX POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WORL 1234S6789G 

EIGHT POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WOR 12345 

TEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH 67890 

TWELVE POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN 12345 

FOURTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HA 6789 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROS 1234 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 5678 

THIRTY POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT T 90 1 2 

THIRTY-SIX POINT 

THE FIRST TIME TH 3456 

FORTY-TWO POINT 

THE FIRST TIME 789 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 235 

LINING GOTHIC CONDENSED 

FORTY-EIGHT POINT 

THE FIRST Tl 123 



SIXTY POINT 




SEVENTY-TWO POINT 



THE FIRST 6 



MONARCH 

SIXTY POINT 



When 12 
THE FIR 



236 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
INTERCHANGEABLE GOTHIC 

SIX POINT 
NO. ONE 

THK MUST TIME THAT TMB GRAND PROSPECT HAD BCCN HELD FORTH TO THE * 



NO. TWO 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE 67B9O 

NO. THREE 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD 12345 

NO. FOUR 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BE 6789O 

NO. FIVE 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 12345 

EIGHT POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND P 67890 

TEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 1 234 

TWELVE POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT 567 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIM 89 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

THE FIRST 3 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 237 

ENGRAVER'S BOLD 

SIX POINT 
NO. ONE 

THK FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH TO THE WOR 12O4B 

NO. TWO 
TIIK FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FORTH GT8OO 

NO. THREE 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE CRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN 18348 

NO. FOUR 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT OT89O 

NO HVE 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAIVD PR 12345 

TWELVE POINT 
NO. ONE 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 6T89O 

NO. TWO 

THE FIRST TIME THA 1234 

NO. THREE 

THE FIRST TIME S6T8 



ADVERTISING FIGURES 

EIGHTEEN POINT NO. ONE 



1234567890 

EIGHTEEN POINT NO. TWO 

1234567890 

THIRTY POINT 

1234567890 



THIRTY POINT OUTLINE 



238 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
LITHO ROMAN 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius snw the fall of Cart 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEE 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 6789O 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 

TEN POINT 

When 41m uglit ful Greeks like Polyh 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like P 6789O 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GR 

FOURTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks 1 1234 
THE FIRST TIME THAT TH 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful G 5678 
THE FIRST TIME THA 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

When though 9012 
THE FIRST TIME 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 239 

CONDENSED TITLE 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of C 1908 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD B 

TEN POINT 

THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PR 1908 



MACFARLAND 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 
When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPEC 



FOURTEEN POINT 



THE FIRST TIME THAT THE 1234 



PAUL REVERE 

EIGHT POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of Garth 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEE 
When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 123456 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BE 

NINE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fa 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT 



240 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
REPRODUCING TYPEWRITER 

SIX POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw the fall of 
Carthage and of Corinth, they must have felt that the/ had 
reached one of the great turning-points in the world's 
history. There was no longer any doubt that all the 
civilized nations hitherto at variance, or at war, 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD BEEN HELD FOR 



NEW MODEL ELITE REMINGTON TYPEWRITER 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Polybius 
saw the fall of Carthage and of Corinth, 
they must have felt that they had reached 
one of the great turning-points in t 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPECT HAD 



REMINGTON TYPEWRITER 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Poly- 
bius saw the fall of Carthage and 
of Corinth, they must have felt that 
they had reached one of the gr 12345 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROSPE 



NEW MODEL REMINGTON TYPEWRITER 

TWELVE POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Poly- 
"bius saw the fall of Carthage and 
of Corinth, they must have felt 
that they had reached one of 67890 
THE FIRST TIME THAT THE GRAND PROS 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 241 

BRADLEY TEXT 

TEN POINT 

When thoughtful Greeks like Poiybius $<w the fall of 12345 

TWELVE POINT 

Often thoughtful Greeks like Polybius saw th 12345 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

Ulhen thoughtful Greeks like Pol 1234 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

Uihen thoughtful Greek 567$ 

TUDOR BLACK 

SIX POINT 

TKHben tbougbtful rcefcs Hfce polbiu0 saw tbe (all of Cartbage ant> of Cor 12345 

EIGHT POINT 

Ulbcn tboucibtful Freehs Uhc pol^biue daw tbe tall 67390 

TEN POINT 

Mben tbougbtful Greefts lifte polpbius 12345 

TWELVE POINT 

Mben tbouabtful (Breefcs like ipol^ 67890 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

When thoughtful (Breeds 1234 

TWENTY POINT 

Mben tbougbtful (5 5678 

THIRTY-SIX POINT 

When tbou 9012 



242 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



PRIORY TEXT 

EIGHT POINT 

tfoouobtful (SceehjS Itfce polpbhtf $aw tbe fan of (Cartbage 12345 



TEN POINT 



t&ottff&tf ttl (Sreefcg Itfce fjolpbitw caru tlje fall of 67890 

TWELVE POINT 

tljougljcful ^wefes! libe pol^btug sfatu tl) 12345 

FOURTEEN POINT 

t^oug^tful (0reeW Itfee ^ol^ 6789 

EIGHTEEN POINT 

tfjougljtful (greeks life 1234 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

tf)ougl)tful (^ree 5678 

9012 



THIRTY POINT 





THIRTY-SIX POINT 




SIX POINT BLACK NO. THIRTEEN 

OTfjrn tfjouflfjtful ffirteka like ^polobiua sato tlje fall of Cartilage anH of Count 123^5 

TWELVE POINT ENGLISH 



tj)ougi)tful (Breeltfii Ufce 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 243 



SHifcflt HougWuI (Srwfcs life? Polpbius sato 12345 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



tbougljtful (gmto life Pole 6789 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



tljou0l)tful (grttfts 12345 



THIRTY POINT 




timitfoi <S 6789 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 






34 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 




tail 1 2 



244 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



WEDDING TEXT 

SIX POINT 
thoughtful <Brfe lUu JaI B biu afo ify fail of Citriff s an!> of Corintlj, tljig 12345 



EIGHT POINT 

fflfycn tfyaugfytful (greeks like ^oigbius snfa 11] e fall of (Carthage mtb 67890 

TEN POINT 

en ttjmtgljifui OircekB like -Jjloigbuts safe tije fall of 12345 



TWELVE POINT 

like 



jett t^ou^tful 

[jcn tfymtgljtful Cireeks like 



FOURTEEN POINT 



EIGHTEEN POINT 
NO. ONE 



en 



m 



ert 



like 



EIGHTEEN POINT 
NO. TWO 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. ONE 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. TWO 



67890 



12345 



67S9 



0123 



4567 



lib S90 



_ SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE _ 245 
ENGRAVER'S OLD ENGLISH 

SIX POINT 

Sljr it t Ijnugljtf ul (Srrrka Ilk* |In ly blua earn tljr fall of CCartfyaijr anil of <Bor 12345 

EIGHT POINT 

SUjrn ttpwgfitful Oirrrha like JliilyhiitH Baiu Ifjr fall of (Carlljaijr BniUlI 

TEN POINT 

6rrrUa likr JIolnlttitH aalu tl|r fall 12345 

TWELVE POINT 



FOURTEEN POINT 

1234 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 



tlj001jtfl Olr^ 0012 

345fi 



THIRTY POINT 




THIRTY-SIX POINT 




tljnug rB9fl 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT 




246 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



TIFFANY SCRIPT 

FOURTEEN POINT 

Me gfayfa* to*, tie &# </ ^artia, 42345 

if ft 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



W/nen wcwiM(tt c/veeKb UKe <_/oiw(iwk tou we 67890 

TWENTY-FOUR POINT 

f4nen mcuanM(M ?wefi& une ^Jol 42345 



THIRTY POINT 




t &reeKb line 67890 



TIFFANY UPRIGHT 

TWELVE POINT 
tKou/lfuf 0*^ Me ^Pol'/iuA ^Z & faff of GwtRa^ 123*5 



FOURTEEN POINT 



Me ^afykuA A aW tg faff of C 67890 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



(JUncn tnaumXai orccfcA liJc <JautoiuA 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



247 



TIFFANY UPRIGHT 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. ONE 



M 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. TWO 



THIRTY POINT 




5678 



&JL 9012 



3-V56 



TIFFANY SHADED 

FOURTEEN POINT 



EIGHTEEN POINT 



9eCA M 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. ONE 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. TWO 



12345 



iuA A 67890 



67890 



^2345 



248 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



CAXTON INITIALS 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 




INITIALS 




SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



249 



INITIALS 



FORTY-EIGHT POINT BURFORD 




250 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
INITIALS 

SEVENTY-TWO POINT BURFORD 




SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



25 1 



INITIALS 

SEVENTY-TWO POINT BURFORD 




FORTY-EIGHT POINT DELLA ROBBIA 







252 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



INITIALS 

TORTY-EIGHT POINT DELLA ROBBIA 







SEVENTY-TWO POINT DELLA ROBBIA 








SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



253 



INITIALS 



SEVENTY-TWO POINT DELLA ROBBIA 











254 TH E UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



INITIALS 

SEVENTY-TWO POINT DELLA ROBBIA 









SIXTY POINT ROYCROFT 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



255 



INITIALS 



SIXTY POINT ROYCROFT 























256 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



INITIALS 

THIRTY POINT JENSON 







SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 257 




INITIALS 

MISCELLANEOUS 









258 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



INITIALS 



MISCELLANEOUS 







12 




14 






17 




18 



19 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



259 





23 




INITIALS 

MISCELLANEOUS 




22 




24 





260 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO COAT-OF-ARMS 




''Cra3''vitu T-n 
-^ catScv Gxccv r 
ta | lanir ' ' 




SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 261 



BRASS CIRCLES 




262 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 




15 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



263 



ORNAMENTS 




28 





264 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 




36 



39 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



265 



ORNAMENTS 




266 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 





53 






54 



55 56 




57 






58 



59 



60 




65 



67 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 267 



ORNAMENTS 



W 

68 




* 



* "fr 

69 70 71 72 73 74 75 



76 



77 78 79 80 81 82 




92 



93 94 



89 90 





96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 



106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 



D 

113 

ffi 



BB1 & * $ 

H '^^^ 117 

91 ffi ifi * 

121 120 119 H8 




.t 





_ _ 

122 123 124 125* 126 127 128 129 



268 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 



130 



131 



132 



133 



134 



135 



136 



137 



138 



139 



jJitK^ 



140 



141 






142 



143 144 145 




146 147 148 149 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



260 



ORNAMENTS 




152 



155 



156 



270 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 




158 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



27,1 



ORNAMENTS 






\\t 



164 165 166 167 168 



169 170 171 172 



173 174 175 176 




160 



179 



180 



272 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 





M 

i 

181 





SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



273 



ORNAMENTS 




191 





195 





274 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 




196 




SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 275 



ORNAMENTS 




i 5 



204 



205 



i 



203 




206 




207 




211 



276 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



ORNAMENTS 




+ || 215 

214 



213 



212 





216 



217 




SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 277 



ORNAMENTS 




219 




220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 




228 




229 




230 



278 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
BRASS RULE FACES 

HAIRLINE (ON ONE- AND TWO-POINT BODY) 

DOTTED (ON ONE-POINT BODY) 

DOTTED (ON TWO-POINT BODY) 

HAIRLINE PARALLEL (ON TWO-POINT BODY) 

HALF-POINT SIDE FACE (ON TWO-POINT BODY) 

ONE-POINT SIDE FACE (ON TWO- AND THREE-POINT BODY) 

TWO POINT 
THREE POINT 
FOUR POINT 



EIGHT POINT 



TEN POINT 



TWELVE POINT 



PRESCRIPTION SIGNS 




SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 279 



BORDERS 



TWO POINT 
NO. ONE 



THREE POINT 
NO. TWO 



FOUR POINT 
NO. FOUR 



SIX POINT 
NO. FIVE 

; . 



NO. EIGHT 

ni 11 ii ii ini ini ~nr~~ii_ n ~1D 



EIGHT POINT 
NO. TEN 



NO. ELEVEN 



NO. TWELVE 






2&o THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



BORDERS 



TWELVE POINT 
NO. THIRTEEN 



NO. FOURTEEN 



NO. FIFTEEN 



NO. SIXTEEN 



NO. SEVENTEEN 



NO. EIGHTEEN 



NO. NINETEEN 



KKKKKKKKKKKSKKKSKXSKK 



TWENTY-FOUR POINT 
NO. TWENTY 



SPECIMENS OF TYPES IN USE 



281 



BORDERS 



THIRTY POINT 
NO. TWENTY-ONE 



******** 



THIRTY-SIX POINT 
NO. TWENTY-TWO 




NO. TWENTY-THREE 









NO. TWENTY-FOUR 




NO. TWENTY-FOUR A 






FORTY-EIGHT POINT 
NO. TWENTY-FIVE 








INDEXES 



INDEX TO MANUAL 



[The numbers, unless otherwise indicated, refer to sections] 



"A" and "an": use of, before h and , 
114; spacing of, 268. 

"a-" (negative particle), compounds with; 
a.a.O., use of, 233. 

Abbreviations: in literary references, no, 
237 (cf. 37); no space between elements 
of, 52, 103; not to be divided, 219; 
of academic titles, 22; of biblical and 
apocryphal books, list of, 100; of di- 
rections, street names, locations of 
property, 1230; of names of states, 106; 
of technicaj terms, list of, in; of titles 
of publications, omission of period after 
initials used for, 1234,- rules for, 106-11; 
omission of period in, i23c; use of apos- 
trophe in, 1236; when not to use, 105; 
of period after, 1230; no period after 
Mile, 123. 

"-able" and "-ible," in divisions, 224. 

Academic degrees, abbreviation and capi- 
talization of, 21-22. 

Accents, retention of, in foreign words 
incorporated into English, 59. 

Acquired, limited, or special meaning, 
words having, capitalization of, 25. 

Acts, juridical, capitalization of names of, 
18. 

A.D. (anno Domini): spacing of, 52, 210; 
use of small caps for, 52. 

Address, capitalization of titles in direct, 
21. 

Address line: at end of letters, etc., how to 
set, 50; at opening of letters, etc., how 
to set, 64; omission of comma after, 161. 

Addresses, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be roman-quoted, 
82. 

Adjectives: capitalization of, in titles, 
of publications, 41; compound, 183; 
capitalization of, derived from proper 
nouns, i, 9; ending in "-ical," how to 
divide, 229; foreign words not hyphen- 
ated, 59 (p. 27); omission of comma 
between two, 147; proper, capitaliza- 
tion of, 5 (cf. i, 53). 

Administrative bodies, capitalization of 
names of, 12. 

Adverbial clauses, 150. 



Adverbs: capitalization of, in titles of 
publications, 41; ending in "-ly," not 
to be hyphenated with adjectives or par- 
ticiples, 183; use of comma in connec- 
tion with, 145. 

at, rules for use of, 115. 

Ages: historical, linguistic, and geological, 
capitalization of, 14; to be spelled out, 
09. 

Algebraic formulas: italic letters used to 
designate unknown quantities in, 67; 
spacing of, 273. 

Aligning figures, 257, 2736. 

Alignment: in columns of tables, 246; 
of decimals and dollar signs, 245; quo- 
tation marks to be "cleared" in, 90. 

Alliances, political, capitalization of names 
of, 16. 

Alphabetizing of names, rules for, 240. 

A.M. (ante meridiem): 52, 219; use of small 
caps for, 52. 

American system of divisions, 221. 

"Ampersand": definition of, 107; when 
used, 107. 

And: "short," 107; when to use comma 
before, 143. 

Anglicized derivatives from Latin and 
Greek, form of diphthongs ce and <x in, 
115- 

"Angstrom units," abbreviation for, 23, 
in. 

"Ante," compounds with, 208. 

" Anti," compounds with, 208. 

Antithetical clauses, punctuation of, 149 

Apocrypha: list of abbreviations for, 109; 
titles of, to be set in roman, 60. 

Apostles, omission of "St." in connection 
with names of, 108. 

Apostrophe: rules for use of, 163-65; use 
of, in .inlractions, 1236; to form 
plural vi numerals, 165; to form pos- 
sessive, 164 (cf. 113); to mark omis- 
sion of figures or letters, 163 (cf. 1236). 

Appositional clauses, punctuation of, 150. 

Arabic numerals: spacing of, at beginning 
of lines, 271; in headlines, spacing of, 271; 
used for biblical references, 134, 173. 



285 



286 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



Art, titles of works of, to be roman- 
quoted, 84. 

Article: definite, not to be used in connec- 
tion with "Rev." and "Hon.," 92; 
not to be treated as part of title of peri- 
odicals, 43; indefinite, form of, before en, 
sounded h, "one," etc., and long , 114. 

Articles, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be roman-quoted, 
82. 

Artificial noun-formations, plural of, 165. 

Artistic schools, capitalization of names 
of, 9. 

"As follows," use of colon in connection 
with, 132. 

Asterisk, use of, for footnote index, 232. 

Astronomical terms: capitalization of, 48; 
italics not used for, 71. 

Astro physical Journal: connecting num- 
bers in, 173, note; metric symbols in, 
123, note; style for footnotes in, 239, 
note; use of comma with figures in, 
159, note. 

Authors: hints to, pp. 121-24; names of, 
if in text, not repeated in footnotes, 
23S- 

Averages and generalizations, columns 
of, in tables, sometimes in distinctive 
type, 241, 250 (Table III). 

Bastard title. See Half-title. 

B.C. ("before Christ"): spacing of, 52, 
219; use of small caps for, 52; hundreds 
to be repeated with, 173. 

"Bi-," compounds with, 197. 

Bible: books of, abbreviations for, 109; 
capitalization of names for, 29; titles 
of books of, to be capitalized, 31; to be 
set in roman, 60; versions of, abbrevia- 
tions for, 109; capitalized, 30. 

Biblical: books, abbreviations for, 109, 
and capitalization of names of, 31; 
parables, capitalization of, 32; terms, 
miscellaneous, capitalization of, 33. 

Bills, legislative, capitalization of, 18. 

Biological terms, use of capitals in, 46. 

Black face. See Bold-face type. 

Blank verse, indention of, 275. 

Blanks, use of leaders for, in ruled columns 
of figures, 245; in open tables, see 
specimen tables in, 250. 

Blocks, capitalization of names of, 8. 

Bodies: legislative, judiciary, and admin- 
istrative, capitalization of names of, 12; 
military, numbers of, to be spelled 
out, 100. 



Bold-face type: defined, 255; how indi- 
cated, 255. 

"Book," compounds of, 186. 

Books: biblical, abbreviation of, 109, and 
capitalization ot, 31; capitalization of 
titles of, 41; italics for titles of, 60. 

Botanical Gazette: exception to rule for 
capitalization of titles of publications 
in, 41, note; to hyphenization of com- 
pounds of "co-," etc., 203, note; to rule 
for italics, 60, note; to rule for quotation 
marks, 82, note; metric symbols in, 
123, note; footnotes in, 239, note; thou- 
sands in, 159, note. 

Botanical terms: use of capitals in, 46; 
of italics, 46, 71. 

Bourgeois, explained, 252. 

Box-heads: defined, 282; how to set, 
242; illustrated, 250; . omission of 
period after, 125; use of capitals in, 41. 

Brackets, rules for use of, 178-79. 

Break, or change, in sentence, to be indi- 
cated by dash, 166. 

Breakline: defined, 217; spacing of, 267. 

Brevier, explained, 252. 

'Brother," compounds of, 190. 

"Brothers," forming part of name of 
firm, 107. 

Buildings, capitalization of names of, 8. 

But-clauses, use of comma in connection 
with, 144. 

" By-," compounds with, 202* 

C, soft, do not divide on, 223. 

Capitalization: of abbreviations of aca- 
demic degrees, celestial objects, etc., 
22; of abbreviations of one letter, 
23; of abbreviations of journals, 42; 
of adjectives derived from proper nouns, 
i, 42; of adjectives and nouns desig- 
nating definite geographical regions, 
5; of books of the Bible and other 
sacred books, 31; botanical terms, 46; 
of church fathers, 27; of conventions, 
congresses, expositions, etc., 17; of 
creeds and confessions of faith, 19; 
of Egyptian dynasties, 13; epithets, 
used as proper names, 2; of exclama- 
tions "O" and "Oh," 40, 117; of 
familiar names applied to particular 
persons, 21; of first words, 34-36, 38, 
39; of feast days and civic holidays, 20; 
of geographical names, 4-5; of geo- 
logical epochs, 14, 46; of governmental 
departments, 12; of Greek and Latin 
poetry, 34; of historical epochs, 14; of 
important events^ 15; of legislative, 
judiciary, and administrative bodies, 12. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEX 



287 



of linguistic and literary periods, 14, 1 23 ; 
of miscellaneous terms, g, 16, 33; of 
monastic orders, 10; of names for the 
Bible, 29; of names of regiments, 13; 
of names and epithets of peoples, races, 
and tribes, 47; of names of bodies of 
solar system, 48; of "nature," etc., and 
abstract ideas, personified, 26; of nouns 
and adjectives used to designate the 
Supreme Being, or any member of the 
Tnnity, 24; of nouns followed by a 
numeral, 37; of organizations and 
institutions, 11-12; of particles (in 
French, Dutch, German names), 3; of 
periods in history or literature, 14; 
of philosophical, literary, and artistic 
schools, 9; of poetry, 34; of political 
alliances, 16; of political divisions, 6-7; 
of political parties, 9, 16; of principal 
words, 41; of pronouns referring to the 
Supreme Being, 24; of proper nouns 
and adjectives, i, 5, 24, 53; of regions 
or parts of world, 5; of terms applied 
to groups of states, 5; of religious 
denominations and edifices, 9, 28; 
of scientific names of divisions, orders, 
genera, species, etc., 46; of sessions of 
Congress, 13; of thoroughfares, parks, 
squares, blocks, buildings, etc., 8; 
of titles, academic degrees, orders 
(decorations), etc., 21 (cf. 49); of titles 
of publications, 41; of titles of manu- 
scripts, 44; of treaties, acts, laws, bills, 
etc., 18; of versions of the Bible, 30; 
of words with an acquired, limited, or 
special meaning, i, 25; of zoological 
and paleontological matter, 46; verbs 
derived from proper names and haying 
a specialized meaning, not capitalized, 
i; rules for, 1-57; word-lists, 4. 

Capitals: how indicated, 257; rules for 
use of, 1-49. 

Capitals and small capitals, rules for use 
of, 50, 51. 

Caps. See Capitals. 

Catalogues, designation of celestial ob- 
jects in, 71. 

Center-heads: defined, 279; illustrated, 
279; use of capitals in, 41. 

"Centigrade," abbreviation for, in. 

Centuries, numbers of, to be spelled out, 

100. 

Cf., to be set in roman, 61. 

Chapters, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be roman-quoted, 
82. 

Chemical symbols, how to treat, 71, 123. 

Christian names, to be spelled out, 93. 

"Church," when capitalized, 28. 



Church fathers: omission of " St." in con- 
nection with names of, 108; when capi- 
talized, 27. 

Citations: from different authors follow- 
ing each other uninterrupted by any 
intervening original matter, 73; of pas- 
sages in author's own words, 74 (cf. 
85); rules for reduction of, 85-87; for 
punctuation of, 112. 

Civil titles, capitalization of, 21. 

Classical references, rules for punctuation, 
237- 

Clauses, punctuation of: adverbial, 150; 
antithetical, 149; appositional, 150; 
complementary, 169; conjunctive, 144; 
parenthetical, 150, 167, 169, 177; 
participial, 148; summarizing, 170. 

"Cleared," definition of, 90. 

"Co-," compounds with, 203. 

Colon: definition and illustration of use 
of, 131; rules for use of, 131-36; use 
of, after salutatory phrase at beginning 
of letters, 133; between place of publi- 
cation and publisher's name, 135; in 
connection with introductory remarks 
of speaker, 133; to emphasize close 
connection between two clauses, 131; 
to introduce statement, extract, etc., 
131; to separate chapter and verse in 
Scripture passages, 134; to separate 
volume and page references, 134; clause 
from illustration or amplification, 131; 
hours and minutes in tune indications, 
134- 

Columns of figures, spacing of, 245. 

Combination of words into one adjective 
preceding noun, use of hyphen for, 

Comma: definition and illustrations of 
use of, 141; omission of, between two 
adjectives, 147; in signatures and after 
author's name at beginning of articles, 
161; use of, after digits indicating 
thousands, 159; before "and,'' "or, 
and "nor," 143; before "of" in con- 
nection with residence or position, 157; 
omission of, between consecutive pages, 
etc., 158; between month and year, 160; 
in connection with adjectival phrases, 
152; omitted before "rather," 146; 
with adverbial clauses, 150; with anti- 
thetical clauses, 149; with appositional 
clauses, 150; with brief quotations or 
maxims, 156; with clauses ending in 
different prepositions, 153; with con- 
junctions, 144; with conjunctions, 
adverbs, connective particles, and 
phrases, 145; with parenthetical clauses, 
150; with participial clauses, 148; to 



288 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



indicate omissions, 155; to separate 
identical, or similar, words, 151; to 
separate numbers, 154; to separate 
proper nouns, 142; rules for use of, 
141-62. 

Commercial: firms, how to treat titles of. 
107 1 organizations and institutions, 
capitalization of names of, n. 
"Company," to be abbreviated when 

forming part of name of firm, 107. 
Complementary clauses, use of dashes in 

connection with, 169. 
Component elements, omission of, in 

compound words, 211. 
Compound adjectives, 183. 
Compound words, etymological division 
of, 221; omission of element common 
to two or more, to be indicated by 
hyphen, 211. 

Compounds: hyphenated, capitalization 
of nouns constituting parts of, in titles, 
45; of "book," "house," "mill," 
"room," "shop," "work," 186; of 
"father," "mother," "brother," "sister," 
"daughter," "parent," and "foster," 
190; of "fellow," 189; of "god," 195; 
of "half," "quarter," etc., 196; of 
"life" and "world," 192; of "maker" 
and "dealer," 187; of "master," 194; 
of present participles with nouns or 
prepositions, 185; of "self," 198; of 
"skin," 193; of "st9re," 188; with 
"ante," "infra," "inter," "intra," 
"post," "sub," "super," "supra," and 
"anti," 208; with "by-," 202; with 
"co-," "pre-," and "re-," 203; with 
"extra," "pan," and "ultra," 209; 
with "fold," 199; with "great," in lines 
of descent, 191; with "like," 200; with 
negative particles "un-," "in-," il-," 
"im-," and "a-," 205; with "non-," 
205; with "over" and "under," 207; 
with "quasi-," 206; with "semi-," 
"demi-," "tri-," "bi-," etc., 197; with 
"vice," "ex-," "elect," and "general," 
in titles, 201. 
Confessions of faith, capitalization of 

names of, 19. 

Congress: capitalization of names of 

houses of, 12; of sessions of, 13; mem- 

bers-of, to be lower-cased, 21; numbers 

of sessions of, to be spelled out, 100. 

Congresses, capitalization of names of, 17. 

Conjunctions, use of comma in connection 

with, 145. 
Connective particles, use of comma in 

connection with, 145. 
" Continued": after headlines, to be set in 
italics, 73; at end of articles, etc., to be 



placed between brackets, and in reduced 

type, 179. 
Contraction of word, use of apostrophe in, 

1236, 163. 

Conventions, capitalization of names of, 17. 
Copyholders, hints to, pp. 130-32. 
Creeds, capitalization of names of, 19. 
Cut-in heads: defined and illustrated, 

281; omission of period after, 125; use 

of capitals in, 41. 
Cycles of poems, titles of: capitalization 

of principal words in, 41; to be itali- 
cized, 60. 
"Czar," when capitalized, 21. 

Dagger, use of, for footnote index, 232. 

Danish titles of publications, use of capi- 
tals in, 42c. 

Dashes: definition and illustrations of use 
of, 166; different sizes of, explained, 
261; illustrated, 261; rules for use of, 
in punctuation, 166-75; use of, at end 
of word or phrase implied at beginning 
of each of succeeding paragraphs, 171; 
for emphasis, 168; in connection with 
literary references, 174; with other 
points, 175; with parenthetical clauses, 
168-69; with complementary clauses, 
169; with direct discourse in French 
and Spanish, 1716; to connect numbers, 
173; to denote break, stop, transition, 
or change in sentence, 166; to precede 
summarizing clauses, 170; for purposes 
other than punctuation, 261. 

Dates: hundreds repeated, when and 
when not, 173; of publications, to follow 
volume numbers in references to periodi- 
cals, 238; other order of citation, 238; 
st, d, and th to be omitted from, 102; 
use of comma between month and year 
in, 160. 

"Daughter," compounds of, 190. 

"De," rule for treatment of, 240*:. 

"Dealer," compounds of, 187. 

Decades, references to, to be spelled out, 
101. 

Decimal point, period leader used for, 244. 

Decorations, capitalization of names of , 21 . 

Degrees, academic, abbreviation and capi- 
talization of, 21-22. 

"Demi-," compounds with, 197. 

Denominations, religious, capitalization 
of names of, 9. 

Departments: governmental, capitaliza- 
tion of names of, 12; of University of 
Chicago, 49- 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEX 



Derivation, division according to, to be 
avoided, 221. 

Derivatives: from Greek and Latin, 115; 
from proper names, 53; English, from 
scientific names not capitalized, 46; from 
words ending in /, how to divide, 227. 

Diagrams, letters referring to, 68. 

Digraphs. Ste Ligature. 

Dimensions, punctuation, 94, 159. 

Diphthongs, to be treated as one letter in 
divisions, 226. 

Divided word to be avoided: at end of 
next to last line of paragraph, 217; at 
bottom of recto page, 217. 

Division of words: rules for, 215-31; 
systems of, 221; use of hyphen to indi- 
cate, 182; avoidance of unnecessary, 
215; on two letters, to be avoided, 216; 
of foreign words, 231; never on syllable 
with silent vowel, 221; in foreign lan- 
guage, 231. 

Divisional mark in middle of sentences, 
not to be put at end of line, 220. 

Divisions of publications, titles of: capi- 
talization of principal words in, 41 ; to be 
roman-quqted, 82. 

Divisions, political: capitalization of 
names of, 6-7; numbered, to be spelled 
out, 100. 

Divisions of the University of Chicago, 
capitalization of names of, 49. 

Documents, titles of: capitalization of 
principal words in, 41; to be italicized, 
60 (cf. 18). 

Double dagger, use of, for footnote index, 
232. 

Double rules, use of, in tables, 247. 

Doubt, use of interrogation point to ex- 
press, 129. 

Drop-folio, defined, 291. 

Dutch names, capitalizing of "Van" and 
"Ten" in, 3; indexing of, 24oc; titles of 
publications, use of capitals in, 42^. 

Dynasties, Egyptian: capitalization of 
names of, 13; to be spelled out, 100. 

Editions: number of, indicated by superior 
figure within punctuation, 237 (n. 6). 

Editors, hints to, pp. 121-24. 

Educational organizations and institu- 
tions, capitalization of names of, ir. 

E.g., to be set in roman, 61. 

"Elect," suffixed to titles, 201. 

Ellipses: rules for use of, 180-81; to be 



treated as part of quotation, 88, 181; 
use of, to indicate omissions, 180. 

Em, defined, 261. 

Em dash: defined, 261; illustrated, 261; 
use of, for "to" in time indications, 
173- 

Em quad: after sentences, 261, 262; de- 
fined, 261; illustrated, 261. 

Emphasis: use of dashes for, 168; of 
exclamation points, 127; of italics, 58. 

En dash: defined, 261; illustrated, 261; 
use of, instead of comma between con- 
secutive pages in literary references, 158 
(cf. 173); instead of hyphen, in com- 
pounds, 183; for "to" connecting two 
words or figures, 173. 

English: equivalent of foreign word or 
phrase, to be quoted, 78 ;_ system of 
division, 221; titles of publications, use 
of capitals in, 41. 

En quad: defined, 261; illustrated, 261. 

Enumerations, use of parentheses in con- 
nection with letters or figures used to 
indicate subdivisions in, 176. 

Epigrammatic turn, use of dash to indi- 
cate, 166. 

Epithets, capitalized, when used as proper 
names, 2. 

Epochs, historical and geological, capitali- 
zation of names of, 14. 

Equivalent, English, of word or phrase 
from foreign language, to be roman- 
quoted, 78. 

Errata, for and read italicized in, 62. 

Essays, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be italicized, 60. 

Etc.: use of comma before, 143; when 
to be treated as part of quotation, 88. 

Etymology, division according to (Eng- 
lish system), 221. 

eu, form of indefinite article before, 114. 

Even spacing, importance of, 265. 

Events, important historical, capitaliza- 
tion of names of, 15. 

"Ex-," prefixed to titles, 201. 

Exclamation point, rules for use of, 127- 
28. 

Exclamatory "Oh," 117. 

Explanation: of technical terms, 251-94; 
use of brackets for, 178. 

Expositions, capitalization of names of, 17. 

"Extra," compounds with, 209. 

Extracts, rules for punctuation of, 112. 



2QO THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



F., ff. (=" following"): spacing of, 269; 
use of, no. 

Face, defined, 256. 

"Fahrenheit," abbreviation for, in. 

"Farther" and "further," differentiation 
of, 1 1 6. 

"Father": compounds of, igo; when 
capitalized, 27. 

Feast days, capitalization of names of, 20. 

"Fellow," compounds of, 189. 

Figures: columns of, in tables, 245; rules 
for use of, 94-98. 

Figures (illustrations) in text, letters re- 
ferring to, 68, 93. 

Firms, names of commercial: abbrevia- 
tion of, 107; capitalization of, u. 

First words: after a colon, when capital- 
ized, 35; following "Whereas" and 
"Resolved" in resolutions, capitali- 
zation of, 39; in sections of enumera- 
tion, when capitalized, 36; in titles of 
publications, capitalization of, 41; of 
citations, when capitalized, 38 (cf. 131); 
of lines of poetry, capitalization of, 34; 
of quotations, when lower case is used 
for, 57 (cf. 131); of sentences, capitali- 
zation of, 34. 

Five-em space, denned, 261. 

"Flush," defined, 280. 

"Fold," combinations with, igg. 

Folio, defined, agi. 

Font, defined, 257. 

Footnotes: exceptions to general style 
for, 237, 239, note; general style for, 
237; indexes for references to, 232; 
numbering of, 239; placing of index 
figure, 236; rules for, 232-39; samples 
of, 237; to tables, 234. 

Foreign institutions and organizations, 
capitalization of titles of, n. 

Foreign languages: division of words in, 
231; English translation accompany- 
ing word, phrase, or passage cited from, 
to be quoted, 78; sentences and passages 
quoted from, how to treat, 59, 85; words 
and phrases from, use of italics for, 59; 
words and phrases borrowed from, in- 
corporated into English, how to treat, 59. 

Foreign titles of publications, capitaliza- 
tion of, 42. 

"Format" of books (410, 8vo, etc.), not 
to be treated as abbreviations, I23C. 

Formulas: spacing of, 273; use of italics 
in, 67. 

"Fort," to be spelled out, 104. 

"Foster," compounds of, 190. 



Foul proof, defined, 288. 

Foundry-proof, defined, 287. 

Four-em space, defined, 261. 

Fractions, use of hyphen in, 210. 

French: ellipsis, 180; titles of publications, 
use of capitals in, 426; use of ligatures 
as or <e in, 115; words, division of, 231. 

"Further" and "farther," differentiation 
of, 116. 

G, soft, do not divide on, 223. 
Galley, defined, 283. 
Galley-proof, defined, 285. 
"General," combined with title, 201. 
Geographical names, capitalization of, 4, 

5,6. 
Geological terms, capitalization of, 14, 46; 

italicizing of, 71. 
Geometry, letters used to designate lines, 

etc., in, 67. 
German: index figures in, 232: names 

with umlaut, indexing of, 240*2 ; titles 

of publications, use of capitals in, 42^; 

words, division of, 231. 
Given names. See Christian names. 
"God," compounds of, 195. 
Governmental departments, capitalization 

of names of, 12. 
Grain, abbreviation for, in. 
Gram, abbreviation for, in. 
" Great," compounds of, 191. 
Greek words, division of, 231. 

H, form of indefinite article before 
sounded, 114. 

Hair-space, defined, 261: illustrated, 261. 

Hair-spacing, tabooed, 266. 

"Half," combinations of, with nouns, 
196. 

Half-title, defined, 292. 

Hanging indention: defined and illus- 
trated, 279, 284; indention in, 274. 

Headings, described, 279-83. 

Headlines: of tables, how to set, 249; 
omission of period after, 125; spacing 
of, 271; word "continued" following, 
to be set in italics, 73. 

Heads. See Headings, Headlines. 

Historical: epochs, capitalization of apel- 
lations for, 14; events, capitalization of, 
15; terms of special significance, capi- 
talization of, 16. 

Holidays. See Feast days. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEX 



291 



Honorary titles, capitalization of, 21. 

"Horse-power," abbreviation for, in. 

"House," compounds of, 186. 

Hyphen leader, denned, 244. 

Hyphenated words: division of to be 
avoided, 225; list of, 214; foreign terms 
used as adjectives not to be hyphen- 
ated, 59. 

Hyphens: number of consecutive, allow- 
able at ends of lines. 217; rules for use 
of, 182-214. 

Ibid., use of, 233. 

Ideas, abstract, capitalization of, when 

personified, 26. 
I.e., to be set in roman, 61. 
If-clauses, use of comma in connection 

with, 144. 
Illustrations, letters referring to parts of, 

68. 

Implication of word or phrase, to be indi- 
cated by dash, 171. 
Importance, use of italics for, 58. 
"In-" (negative particle), compounds 

with, 205. 

Indentation. See Indention. 
Indention: explained, 274; of poetry, 

275; rules for, 274-76. 
Index figure, placing of, 236. 
Indexes for footnote references: how to 

number, 239; placing of, 236; sequence 

of, 232; what to use for, 232. 
Indexing: italicizing of "See," "See also," 

in cross-references, 62; rules for, 240; 

sizes of type and style for setting, 240; 

treatment of prefixes and particles in 

proper nouns, 240. 
Industrial organizations and institutions, 

capitalization of names of, n. 
" Infra," compounds with, 208. 
Initials: of titles of publications, use of, 

123; separation of, in different lines, to 

be avoided, 219. 
Institutions: capitalization of names of, 

n; use of roman type for foreign, 59. 
"Inter," compounds with, 208. 
Interpolations, use of brackets for, 178. 
Interrogation point, use of, 129-30. 
"Intra," compounds with, 208. 
Ironical word or phrase: use of quotation 

marks for, 77; use of exclamation 

point for, 127. 
ise and -ize, differentiation between, as 

terminations, 120. 



Italian titles of publications, use of 
capitals in, 426; words, division of, 231. 

Italics: defined, 254; how indicated, 254; 
need not be used in lengthy biblio- 
graphical lists, 60; rules for use of, 
58-73. 

Italicizing: of address lines, 64; of astro- 
nomical names, 71; of letters designating 
unknown quantities, 67; of letters refer- 
ring to letters in illustrations, 68; of 
names of genera and species, 71; of 
initial word, Resolved, 72; of names of 
catalogues of planets, constellations, and 
stars. 71; of symbols indicating sub- 
divisions, 66; of symbols for shillings and 
pence, 70; of titles or position after sig- 
natures, 65; of titles of books and other 
works, 60; of titles of legal causes and 
proceedings, 63; of titles of newspapers, 
to include name of city where published, 
when, 60; of words for and read in 
errata, 62; of words "See" and "See 
also" in cross-references in indexing, 62; 
of words and phrases to which emphasis 
is to be given, 58; of words and phrases 
from foreign languages, 59; of words 
used in literary references, 6 1 ; of words 
representing continuation of article or 
chapter, 73. 

J, do not divide on, 223. 

Journals. See Periodicals. 

Judiciary bodies, capitalization of names 

of, 12. 
Juridical acts, laws, bills, capitalization of 

names of, 18. 
"Justification," defined, 264. 

Kern, defined, 256. 

Lanston. See Monotype. 

Last words, capitalization of, in titles of 
publications, 41. 

Latin: non-uses of ligatures and ce in, 
115; titles of publications, use of capi- 
tals in, 420; words, division of, 231. 

Laws, juridical, capitalization of names 
of, 18. 

"Leaded," defined, 277. 

Leaders: definition and use of, 244; in 
tables, 245, 250. 

Leads, defined, 277. 

Lectures, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be roman-quoted, 
82. 

Legends: letters in, 68; omission of period 
after, 125. 

Legislative bodies, capitalization of names 
of, 12. 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



Letters: in text or legends referring to 
corresponding letter in accompanying 
illustrations (diagrams), 68; references 
to particular, to be set in italics, 69. 

"Life," compounds of, 192. 

Ligatures <z and ce, use of, 115. 

"Like," adjectives ending in, 200. 

Linguistic periods: abbreviation of names 
for, 123; capitalization of, 14. 

Linotype machine (Mergenthaler) : de- 
scribed, 294; how to number footnotes 
in matter set on, 239; spacing on, 260. 

List: of hyphenated words, 214; of words 
of more than one spelling, 119. 

Literary references: abbreviations in, 54, 
107, no, 237; words representing divi- 
sions, when capitalized, 37; list of 
phrases and abbreviations used in, 61. 

Literary -schools, capitalization of names 
of, 9. 

Loc. cit., use of, 233. 

Long primer, explained, 252. 

Lower case: defined, 257; exceptions in- 
cluded in do not's of, i, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 
n, 12, 14, 21, 24, 25, 28, 29, 31, 35, 37. 
45, 46 (see under Capitalization); for 
English derivatives from scientific 
names, 46; rules for use of, 53~S7- 

Machines, typesetting, different styles 

of, 293-94- 

Magazines. See Periodicals. 
"Maker," compounds of, 187. 
Make-up, defined. 290. 
"Manuscript," abbreviation for, 44, 123. 
Manuscripts, titles of: to be set in roman, 

60; use of capitals in, 44. 
" Master," compounds of, 194. 
Mathematical signs, spacing of, 273. 
Measurement: units of, 94; spelled with 

lower-case initial letter, 55; spelled out 

at beginning of sentence, 96. 
Measures, metric, how to designaie, ill. 
Medical terms, capitalization oi, 46; use 

of italics in, to be avoided, 71. 
"Mac," "Me," "M 1 ," rule for treatment 

of, 240. 
Merganthaler. See Linotype. 

Metric: symbols, how to treat, I23c; spa- 
cing of, 269; system, designation of 
weights and measures in, in. 

Military titles, capitalization of, 21. 
"Mill," compounds of, 186. 



Minion, explained, 252. 
Miscellaneous terms, capitalization of, 33. 
Mile and Mme, abbreviations, 123. 
Monastic orders, capitalization of names 

of, 10. 

Monetary symbols, spacing of, 270. 
Money; sums of, how to treat, 94, 97; 

in various countries, 37, 270. 
Monotype machine (Lanston): described, 

293; spacing on, 259. 
Months, names of, when to be spelled 

out, 102. 

"Mother," compounds of, 190. 
Mottoes: capitalization of principal words 

in, 41; to be roman-quoted, 82. 
"Mount," to be spelled out, 104. 
Movements, historical, capitalization of 

names of, 16. 

"Namely," use of colon in connection 
with, 132. 

Names: alphabetization of, 240; Chris- 
tian, to be spelled out, 93; familiar, 
applied to particular persons, to be 
capitalized, 21; proper, capitalization 
of, i. 

Nature, personified, capitalization of, 26. 

Negative particles "un-," "in-," "il-," 
"im-," and "a-," compounds with, 205. 

Newspapers, titles of: the article not to be 
treated as part of, 43; capitalization of 
principal words in, 41; to be italicized, 
60. 

New Testament books, list of abbrevia- 
tions for, 109. 

Nobility, capitalization of titles of, 21. 

"Non-," compounds with, 205. 

Nonpareil, explained, 252 

"Nor," when comma is used before. 143. 

"Not," use of comma before, in anti- 
thetical clauses, 149. 

"Note" introducing note not a footnote, 
use of cap and small caps for, 51. 

"Nothing," not to be divided, 230. 

Nouns: capitalization of, in titles of pub- 
lications. 41; combination of, standing 
in objective relation to each other, 184; 
ending in a sibilant, formation of plural 
of, 165; followed by numeral, capitali- 
zation of, 37 (cf. no); proper, capi- 
talization of, i (cf. 5, 53). 

Numbered political divisions, capitaliza- 
tion of names of, 7. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEX 



293 



Numbers: commencing a sentence, to be 
spelled out, 96; consecutive, treatment 
of, 159, 173; in connected groups to be 
treated alike, 94; in groups of six or 
more closely connected, to be set in 
figures. 94; of less than three digits, to 
be spelled out in ordinary reading- 
matter, 94; round, treatment of, 95; 
use of comma after digits indicating 
thousands, 159; use of comma to sepa- 
rate, 154; use of dash for "to" con- 
necting, 173. 

Numerals: Atabic, at beginning of lines 
and in headlines, spacing of, 271; 
Roman, at beginning of lines and in 
headlines, spacing of, 271; omission of 
period after, 124. 

'O" and "Oh": capitalization of, 40; 
differentiation in use of, 117. 

Occupations, compounds denoting, 187. 

<e. rules for use of, 115. 

Officers: titles of, to be lower-cased, 21; 
of University of Chicago, to be capi- 
talized, 49. 

Offices, capitalization of names of, 12, 21. 

Old Testament books, list of abbreviations 
for, 109. 

Omission: of comma after signatures, etc., 
161; of figures in numbers or letters 
in middle of word, use of apostrophe 
for, 163; of period after headlines, etc., 
125; after Roman numerals, 124; of 5, 
d, and tit in dates, 102; of word or words, 
indicated by comma, 155; use of brack- 
ets for. 178; use of ellipsis for, 180. 

"One," "once," etc., form of indefinite 
article before, 114. 

Op. cil., use of, 233. 

Open tables: headlines for, 242; how to 
set, 241; specimens of, 250. 

"Or," when comma is used before, 143. 

Orders (decorations), capitalization of 
names of, 21 

Orders, monastic, capitalization of names 
of, 10. 

Ordinals: when capitalized, 13; when 
not, 45. 

Organizations, capitalization of names of, 
n. 

Outcry, use of exclamation point after, 127. 

"Over," compounds with, 207. 

Pages, etc., omission of comma with four 
digits, when, 139; spelled out, when, 237; 
symbol "p." to be used, when, 237; use 
of en dash between consecutive, 158 
(cf. 173). 



Page-proof, defined, 286; rules for use 

in, 217, and pp. 127-29. 
Paleontolqgical terms: use of capitals in, 

46; italics not used in, 71. 
Pamphlets, titles of: capitalization of 

principal words in, 41; to be italicized, 

60. 

Papers (addresses), titles of: capitaliza- 
tion of ptincipal words in, 41; to be 

roman-quoted, 82. 
Parables, biblical, capitalization of names 

of, 32. 
Paragraph mark: spacing of, 269; use of, 

for footnote index, 232. 
Paragraphs: explained, 284; first lines of, 

in quoted prose matter to begin with 

quotation marks. 89; indention of, 274; 

styles of, 276 (cf. 284). 

Parallel mark, use of, for footnote index, 
232. 

"Parent," compounds of, 190. 

Parentheses: rules for use of, 176-77; 
use of, for parenthetical clauses, 177 
(cf. 150, 177); in connection with figures 
or letters indicating subsections, 66, 176; 
within parentheses, use of brackets for, 
178. 

Parenthesis, placing of period in connec- 
tion with, 126. 

Parenthetical clauses: use of commas in 
connection with, 150; of dashes, 167, 
169; of parentheses, 177 (cf. 150, 167). 

Parks, capitalization of names of, 8. 

Participial clauses, use of comma in con- 
nection with, 148. 

Participle: omission or retention of final 
e in original word, when, 118; present, 
united with noun, or with preposition, 
185. 

Particles, in French, Dutch, and German 
names, capitalization of, 3. 

Parties, political, capitalization of names 
of, 9. 

Parts (of books, etc.), titles of: capitali- 
zation of principal words in, 41; to be 
roman-quoted, 82. 

Pause, use of dash to indicate, 166. 

Pearl, explained, 252. 

Pence. See Shillings. 

Peoples, races, and tribes, capitalization 
of names or epithets of, 47. 

Per cent: to be expressed in figures, 94; 
not to be treated asan abbreviation, 123. 

Percentages, columns of, in tables, some- 
times in distinctive type, 241. 



294 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



Period: placing of, in connection with 
quotation marks, 126; rules for use 
of, 122-26; to be omitted after abbre- 
viations for linguistic epochs, 123; after 
headlines and legends for cuts and 
tables, 125; after initials of titles of 
publications, 123; after MS ^manu- 
script), 123; use of, after abbreviations, 
123; at end of sentence, 122 (cf. 125); 
in classical references, 237. 

Period leader, defined, 244; used for deci- 
mal point, 244; for pointing in German 
and Spanish numbers, 159 (note). 

Periodicals, titles of: capitalization of 
principal words in, 41; definite article 
not to be tieated as part of, 43; to be 
italicized, 60. 

Periods, geological, historical, linguistic, 
and literary, capitalization of names of, 
14. 

Personifications, capitalization of, 26. 

Philosophical schools, capitalization of 
names of, 9. 

Phrases: adjectival, use of comma in con- 
nection with, 152; conjunctional, etc., 
I4S- 

Pica, explained, 252. 

Place of publication and publisher's name, 
use of colon between, 135. 

Place-names, foreign, how to treat, 59. 

Plain paragraph: defined and illustrated, 
284; indention of, 274. 

Plate-proof, defined, 287. 

Planets, names of, how treated, 71. 

Plays, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in. 41; to be italicized, 60. 

Plurals: formation of, 165; of abbrevia- 
tions of decades, 101; in literary refer- 
ences, how formed, no; of nouns, not 
divisible if singulars are not, 228; of 
numerals and of rare and artificial noun 
coinages, formation of, 165. 

P.M. (post meridiem): spacing of, 52; 
division of, 219; use of small caps for, 52. 

Poems: capitalization of first word of each 
line in English, 34; of first word of each 
paragraph in Greek and Latin, 34; of 
principal words in titles of, 41; titles 
of shorter, to be roman-quoted, 81 (cf. 
60); titles of, when set in italics and 
when in roman, 60. 

Poetry: capitalization of first lines, 34; 
indention of, 275; quotations from, 
when to reduce, 85; when to run into 
the text, 83. 

Point system, explanation of 251-52. 



Political: alliances, capitalization of 
names of, 16; divisions, 6-7; organi- 
zations, n; parties, 9. 

"Pope," when capitalized, 21. 

"Port," to be spelled out, 104. 

Position, use of comma before "of" in 
connection with, 157. 

Possessive case, how formed, 113, 164. 

"Post," compounds with, 208. 

Pounds: in English money, how expressed, 
70, 270. 

"Pre-," compounds with, 203. 

Preface, etc., quotation marks to be omit- 
ted with, 82. 

Prefix or suffix not complete in itself, to 
be indicated by hyphen, 212. 

Prefixes "co-," "pre-," and "re-," how 
to treat, 203. 

Prepositions: formation of nouns of pres- 
ent participles in connection with, 185; 
to be lower-cased in titles, 41; use of 
comma in connection with clauses end- 
ing in different, 153. 

"President," when capitalized, 21, 49. 

Principal words: capitalization of, in 
titles of publications, 41; definition of, 
41. 

Proceedings (of societies), titles of: capi- 
talization of principal words in, 41; to 
be italicized, 60. 

Pronouns: capitalization of, in titles of 
publications, 41; referring to Deity, 24. 

Pronunciation, division according to 
(American system), 221. 

Proofreaders: hints to, pp. 125-29; marks 
of. p. 133- 

Proofs, description of, 285-89. 

Proper names: capitalization of, i; how 
to form possessive of. 113; verbs and 
adjectives derived from, use of lower 
case for, 53. 

Proper nouns: capitalization of, i, 5; 
division of. to be avoided, 218; when 
not capitalized, 53. 

Prose: extracts, when to reduce, 85; 
when to run into text, 85; indention of 
paragraphs in, 274. 

Publications: period to be omitted after 
initials used as abbreviations for, 123; 
titles of, capitalization of principal 
words in, 41; titles of subdivisions of, 
when to be roman-quoted, 82; use of 
italics for, 60; when to be spelled out, 
iS- 

Punctuation: of extracts from modern 
authors, 112; rules for, 121-214. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEX 



295 



Punctuation marks: omission of, in clas- 
sical references, 237; placing of, with 
reference to index figures in text, 232; 
to be printed in same type as word or 
letter preceding them, 121. 

"Pyramid," explained and illustrated, 279. 

Quad, defined, 261. 

Quadrat. See Quad. 

"Quarter," compounds of, 196. 

4to, 8vo, etc., not to be treated as abbre- 
viations, I23C. 

"Quasi-," compounds with, 206. 

Query, use of interrogation point for, 129. 

Question mark. See Interrogation point. 

Questions: direct, to be followed by inter- 
rogation point, 129; indirect, not to be 
followed by interrogation point, 129; in 
Spanish, 129. 

Quotation marks: not to be used in con- 
nection with reduced citations, 87; 
excepti9n to this rule, 75; placing of 
colon in connection _ with, 136; of 
comma, 162; of ellipsis, 181; of excla- 
mation point, 128; of interrogation 
point, 130; of period, 126; of semi-colon, 
140; rules for use of, 74-91; French 
and German, p. 33, footnote; to be 
omitted in references to Preface, Index, 
etc., 82; use of double and single, 91. 

Quotations, how to treat, 74-91; first 
word of, lower-cased when connected 
with previous sentence, 57. 

Races, tribes, and peoples, capitalization 
of names or epithets of, 47. 

"Railroad" and "Railway," to be spelled 
out, 104. 

"Re-," compounds with, 203. 

Reading-matter in columns of ruled tables, 
how to set, 246, 250. 

Recto, defined, 283. 

Reductions: rules for, 85-87, 179; scale 
of, 86. 

Reference indexes, what to use for, 232. 

References, legal, list of words and phrases 
used in, 61; literary: list of words to 
be abbreviated in, no (cf. 37, 54, 237); 
in text, spelled out. 92; punctuation of, 
etc., 237, 239, note; use of dash in 
connection with, 174. 

"Reformer," when capitalized, 27. 

Regiments, capitalization of names of, 13. 

Regions or parts of the world, capitali- 
zation of names of, 5. 

Regular paragraph. See Plain paragraph. 

Religious: denominations, capitalization 
of names of, 9; organizations, n. 



Residence, use of comma before "of" in 
connection with, 157. 

Resolutions: how to introduce para- 
graphs in, 39, 51, 72; word "Resolved" 
in, how to set, 72; word "Whereas," 
Si- 

"Resolved," in resolutions, to be set in 
italics, 73. 

Revise, defined, 289. 

Rhymed lines, in poetry, indention of, 
275- 

Roman numerals: at beginning of lines, 
spacing of, 271 ; in headlines, spacing of, 
271; omission of period after, 124*. 

"Roman-quote," defined, 74, 253. 

Roman type: defined, 253; illustrated, 
257; anglicized foreign words in, 59; 
bibliographical list of books, 60; e.g., 
i.e., v. or vs., viz., 61; Fraunhofer 
lines, 710; letter used in place of name, 
69; lines of hydrogen, 71; spectral types 
of stars, 71; symbols for chemical ele- 
ments, 71. 

"Room," compounds of, 186. 

Round numbers, definition and treatment 
of, 95- 

Ruled tables: blanks in, how expressed, 
245; box-heads for, 242; reading- 
matter in, 246; size to set, 241; space 
between rules and type, 243; specimens 
of, 250; stub, how to set, 244. 

Sacred books, capitalization of names of, 
29. 

"Saint": to be omitted in connection 
with names of apostles, church fathers, 
etc., 108; when abbreviated, 108. 

Salutatory phrase at beginning of letters, 
rules for setting, 50. 

Scandinavian titles of publications, use of 
capitals in, 42. 

Schools, philosophical, literary, and artis- 
tic, capitalization of names of, 9. 

Scientific terms, use of capitals in, 46; of 
italics in, 71. 

Scripture passages: names of books of 
Bible to be abbreviated in, 109; punc- 
tuation of, 134, 139; spacing of, 272. 

"Section," introducing paragraphs and 
followed by a number, use of cap and 
small caps for, 51. 

Section mark: spacing of, 269; use of, for 
footnote index, 232. 

Sects, religious, capitalization of names 
of, 9. 

See and See also italicized, when, 62. 



296 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



"Self," compounds of, 198. 
"Semi-," compounds with, 197. 

Semicolon: separating two or more dis- 
tinct clauses in enumerations, 36; illus- 
ttation of use of, compared with that of 
comma, 137; placing of, in connection 
with quotation marks, 140; rules for 
use of, 137-40; use of, in enumerations, 
138; to mark division of sentence, 137; 
to separate passages in Scripture refer- 
ences containing chapters, 139. 

Separation: of terms complete in them- 
selves not to be made, 219; of word at 
end of recto page, 217. 

Sequences: of footnote indexes, 232; of 
subdivisional numberings, 176; of three 
or more links, use cf comma before 
"and," "or," and "nor" in, 143. 

Series titles, to be roman-quoted, 80. 

Series, use of comma before final "and," 
"or," and "nor" in, 143. 

Sermons, titles of, to be roman-quoted, 
82. 

Shank, defined, 256. 

Shillings and pence, how to treat abbre- 
viations for, 70. 

Ships, names of, to be roman-quoted, 83. 

" Shop," compounds of, 186. 

"Short and": definition of, 107; when 
used, 104, 107. 

Short words: avoidance of divisions of, 
216; spacing of, 268. 

Shoulder, defined, 256. 

Side-heads: defined, 280; omission of 
period after, 125; use of dash in con- 
nection with, 172; use of lower case 
in, 56 (cf. 172). 

Signatures at end of letters or articles: 
omission of comma after, 16 1 ; of period, 
125; abbreviation of address in, 106; 
rules for setting of, 50, 65. 

"Sister," compounds of, 190. 

Sizes of type, in ordinary use, samples of, 
252. 

"Skin," compounds of, 193. 

Slug, defined, 278. 

Small caps: defined, 257; how indicated, 
257; use of, 52; in tabular work, 242, 
249; in headings, 279. 

Small pica, explained, 252. 

Social organizations, capitalization of 
names of, n. 

Soft c or g, do not divide on, 223. 



Solar system, capitalization of names of 
bodies in, in works on astronomy, 48. 

"Solid," defined, 277. 

Space omitted between components of 
certain abbreviations, 22, 52, 103, 163. 

Spaces: different sizes of, explained, 259, 
261; specimen of lines spaced with 
different sizes of, 261. 

Spacing: in breakline, 266-67; in foundry 
type (and general) composition, 261-64; 
in linotype composition, 260; in mono- 
type composition, 259; its effect on ety- 
mological divisions, 221; of divisional 
signs, 269; of figure columns in tables, 
245; of formulas, 273; of headlines, 271; 
of metric symbols, 269; of monetary 
symbols, 270; of numerals at beginning 
of paragraphs, 271; of rules in tables, 
243; of Scripture passages, 272; of short 
words, 268; rules for, 258-73; standard, 
262; what is considered good, 262; 
with different sizes of spaces, samples of, 
261. 

Spanish titles of publications, use of capi- 
tals in, 426; words, division of, 231. 

Species, scientific names of: use of capi- 
tals in, 46; of italics, 71. 

Specimen tables, 250. 

Spelled out, words, phrases, and titles 
which are to be, 92-105. 

Spelling: list of words of more than one, 
119; of ages, 99; of books of Bible, 109; 
of centuries, 100; of Christian names, 
93; of "Company" and "Brothers" 
in names of firms, 107; of decades, 101; 
of Egyptian dynasties, 100; of extracts 
from modern authors, 112; from Old 
English, 112; of indefinite article before 
h, u, etc., 114; of metric symbols, HI; 
of names of months, 102; of names of 
publications, 105; of names of regi- 
ments, 100; of numbers commencing 
a sentence, 96; of numbers of less than 
three digits, 94; of possessives of proper 
names ending in a sibilant, 113; of 
"Railroad" and "Railway," 104; of 
round numbers, 95; of "Saint," 108; 
of sessions of Congress, 100; of states 
and territories, 106; of sums of money, 
97; of time of day, 98; of titles, 92; 
of "United States," 103; of words 
denoting subsections, in literary refer- 
ences, no; rules for, 92-120. 

Squares, capitalization of names of, 8. 

"St.," indexing of names with, 2400. 

Standard: of measurement in typography, 
252; space used to separate words, 261. 

Stars, names of, how treated, 71. 



MANUAL OF STYLE: INDEX 



297 



"State," when capitalized, 28, note. 

States and territories: list of abbrevia- 
tions for, 1 06; to be abbreviated when 
following those of towns, 106; names of 
groups of, when capitalized, 5. 

Statistics, treatment of numbers in, 94. 

"Store," compounds of, 188. 

Stub: brace, when used in, 244; definition 
of, 242; head for, 242; leaders, when 
used in, 244. 

Styles of type, 253-57. 

"Sub," compounds with, 208. 

Subdivisions: in literary references, use 
of lower case for, 54 (cf. no, 237); 
letters used to indicate, to be set in 
italics, 66; use of parentheses in con- 
nection with, 66; of publications, capi- 
talization of principal words in titles of, 
41; titles of, to be roman-quoted, or 
capitalized without quotation marks, 82. 

Suffix or prefix, indicated by hyphen, 212. 

Summarizing clauses, use of dashes in 
connection with, 170. 

"Super," compounds with, 208. 

Superior figures, use of, for reference 
indexes, 232, 234; for number of edi- 
tion, 237 (n. 6). 

Superscriptions, omission of period after, 
125- 

"Supra," compounds with, 208. 

Supreme Being, capitalization of names 
for, and pronouns referring to, 24. 

Syllabi, scheme of notation and inden- 
tion of subdivisions in, 176. 

Syllables, hyphen used to indicate, 213. 

Symbols: chemical, treatment of, 71, 123; 
metric, spacing of, 269; treatment of, 
in, 123; monetary, spacing of, 270; 
of measurement, abbreviation of, in; 
as reference indexes, 232. 

Tables: blanks in, 245 (but see 230, open 
tables); columns representing totals, 
percentages, etc., frequently set off by 
different type, 241; continued, 247, 
248, 250; footnotes to, 232, 234, 249; 
headlines of. how to set, 249; of two 
columns, to be set as open, 248; of more 
than two, as pled, 248; open, headlines 
for columns in, 242; open, how to set, 
241; ruled, box-heads for, 242; ruled, 
how to set, 241 ; rules for setting of, 241- 
50; rules for use of rules in, 243, 247; 
specimen, 250; use of braces in, 244 
(and see specimen tables, 250); use of 
leaders in, 244, 245 (and open tables, 
250). 



Tabular work, rules for, 241-50 (see 
Tables). 

Technical: terms, explanation of typo- 
graphical, 251-94; words or phrases, 
use of quotation marks for, 77. 

"The" not to be treated as part of title of 
newspapers or magazines, 43. 

Thick space, defined, 261. 

Thin space, defined, 261. 

Thin-spacing, where to avoid, 265. 

Thoroughfares: capitalization of names 
of, 8; numbers forming part of names 
of, to be spelled out, 100. 

Thousands, use of comma after digits 
indicating, 159. 

Three-em dash: defined, 261; illustrated, 
261. 

Three-em quad, defined, 261. 

Three-em space, defined, 261. 

Time: indications, how to punctuate, 134; 
of day, how to treat, 98; do not divide 
over line, 219. 

Titles: academic, to be abbreviated, 22; 
civil and military, capitalization of, 21; 
honorary, 21; in direct address, 21; of 
nobility, 21; preceding names, to be 
spelled out, 92; list of exceptions, 92; 
"vice," "ex-," "elect." and "general," 
constituting parts of, how to treat, 201. 

Titles of legal causes and proceedings, 
italicized, 63. 

Titles of publications: capitalization of 
principal words in s 41; use of capitals 
in: English, Latin, French, Italian, 
Spanish, Scandinavian, German, Dan- 
ish, Dutch, 42; use of italics for, 60; 
of roman-quoted, 80, 81, 82; to be 
correctly quoted, 112; when to be 
spelled out, 105; of addresses, 82; of 
articles, 82; of books, 60; of chapters 
82; of cycles of poems, 60; of divisions 
of books, etc., 82; of documents, 60; 
of essays, 60; of lectures, 82: of news- 
papers, 60; of pamphlets, 60; of papers, 
82; of periodicals, 60; of plays, 60; 
of poems, printed in separate volume, 60; 
of poems, short, 81 (cf. 60); of proceed- 
ings of societies, 60; of series, 8p; of 
tracts, 60; of transactions of societies, 
60; of treatises, 60. 

To, use dash in place of word, 158, 173. 

Toasts, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be roman-quoted, 
82. 

"To be continued," at end of articles, how 
to set, 73, 179. 



298 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



"Today," "tonight," "tomorrow," hy- 
phen to be omitted with, no, 204, note. 

Totals, columns of, in tables, sometimes 
in distinctive type, 241. 

Town and state, names of, in date line, 
how to set, 50. 

Tracts, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41 ; to be italicized, 60. 

Transactions (of societies), titles of: capi- 
talization of principal words in, 41; 
to be italicized, 60. 

Transition, use of dash to indicate, 166. 

Translation of foreign words or phrases, 
quoted, 78. 

Treaties, capitalization of names of, 18. 

Treatises, titles of: capitalization of prin- 
cipal words in, 41; to be italicized, 60. 

"Tri-," compounds with, 197. 

Tribes, races, and peoples, capitalization 
of names and epithets of, 47. 

Trinity, Christian, capitalization of names 
of members of, 24. 

Two-column tables, to be set as open> 
248. 

Two-em dash: defined, 261; illustrated, 
261. 

Two-em quad, defined, 261. 

Two-letter syllables, avoidance of, in 
divisions, 216. 

Type: different parts of body of, ex- 
plained, 256; names for different sizes 
of, 252; styles of, 253-57. 

Typesetting machines, 293-94. 

Typographical terms, explanation of, 
251-94. 

U, long, form of indefinite article before, 
114. 

"Ultra," compounds with, 209. 

Umlaut, indexing of names beginning with, 
Mot, 

"Un-," compounds with, 205. 

"Under," compounds with, 207. 

Unit, typographical, explained, 251; on 
monotype machine, 259. 

Units of measurement, abbreviations for, 
in; spelled with lower-case initial let- 
ter, 55. 

"United States": when to be spelled out, 
103; when to be abbreviated, 103. 



University of Chicago: capitalization of 
special terms dealing with organization, 
administration, and curricula of, 49; 
of titles of divisions, departments, offi- 
cers, and courses and units of study, in 
official work dealing with, 49. 

Unusual word or phrase, use of quotation 
marks for, 77. 

"Van," rule for treatment of, 3, 24oc. 

Verbs: capitalization of, in titles of pub- 
lications, 41; derived from proper 
names, how to treat, 53. 

Verse or page, letter affixed to number of, 
to denote fractional part: to be set in 
italic, 66; spacing of (see example), 66. 

Versions of Bible: abbreviations for, 109; 

capitalization of, 30. 
Verso, defined, 283. 
Versus (v., vs.), 59 (word-list), 61. 
"Vice," prefixed to titles, how to treat, 201. 
Vocative, "O," 117. 
"Vol," "chap.," "p.," etc., in literary 

references: use of numerals with, 237; 

when omitted, 237; when spelled out, 

237- 

"Von," rule for treatment of, 3, 2406. 
Vowel: divide on, whenever possible, 224; 

single, forming separate syllable in 

middle of word, to be put in first line 

in dividing, 224. 

Weights and measures, metric: how to 
designate, 94, in; punctuation in, 159 
spacing of, 269. 

"Whereas," in resolutions, use of cap and 
small caps for, 51. 

Wide spacing, where to avoid, 265. 

Word or phrase: accompanied by its defi- 
nition, to be quoted, 76; to which 
attention is directed, use of quotation 
marks for, 79. 

Words: common, from proper names with 
a specialized meaning, lower case, 53; 
hyphenated, list of, 214; of more than 
one spelling, how to spell, 119. 

"Work," compounds of, 186. 

Works of art, titles of, to be roman-quoted, 

84. 
"World," compounds of, 192. 

Zoological terms; use of capitals in, 46; 
of italics, 71. 



INDEX TO TYPES, ETC. 

[The numbers in this index refer to pages] 



Advertising figures, 231. 
Antique Greek, 181. 
Arabic, 182. 

Black Gothic, 233. 

Body Type (for hand composition): 
Modern: five point No. sixty -seven, 137; 
five point No. five hundred twenty- 
seven, 137; six point No. fifty-seven, 
138; seven point No. fifty-seven, 139; 
eight point No. fifty-seven, 140; nine 
point No. fifty-seven, 141; eleven 
point No. sixty-five, 142; six point 
Scotch Roman, 170; eight point Scotch 
Roman, 171; ten point Scotch Roman, 
172; eleven point Scotch Roman, 173; 
twelve point Scotch Roman, 174; 
fourteen point Scotch Roman, 175 
Old Style: five point No. eight, 143; 
fourteen point No. eight, 144; eighteen 
point No. eight, 145; eight point Caslon, 
166; ten point Caslon, 167; twelve 
point Caslon, 168; fourteen point 
Caslon, 169; six point Bookman, 176; 
eight point Bookman, 177; ten point 
Bookman, 178; twelve point Bookman, 
179- 

Bold-Face Italic, 229. 

Bookman: on six-, eight-, ten-, and 
twelve-point body, 176-79. 

Borders, 270-81. 

Bradley Text, 241. 

Brass Circles, 261. 

Brass Rule Faces, 278. 

Canceled letters and figures, 183. 

Caslon Old Style: monotype, 165; 
foundry type, 186, 187. 

Century Expanded, 216. 

Chaucer Text, 243. 

Coat-of-Arms, University of Chicago, 260. 

Cheltenham: Bold, 203-5; Bold Con- 
densed, 201-2, 205-7; Bold Extra 
Condensed, 109-200; Bold Extended, 
209; Bold Italic, 210-211; Condensed, 
198; Old Style, 194; Old Style Italic, 
194-95; Wide, 196-97. 

Clarendon, 212. 



Cloister Black, 223. 
Condensed Title, 239. 
Copperplate, 233. 

Gushing: foundry type, 215; modern 
figures with, 164; monotype, 158-64. 

Delia Robbia, 213-14. 
DeVinne, 224-27. 
DeVinne Condensed, 228-29. 
Elzevir Italic, 189. 
Engraver's Bold, 237. 
Engraver's Old English, 245. 
thiopic, 182. 

othic: Black, 233; Condensed, 232; 
Interchangeable, 236; Lining Con- 
densed, 234-35; Lightface, 232; Title, 
212. 

Gothic Condensed, 232. 

Gothic Title, 212. 

Goudy: Old Style, 217-18; Old Style 

Italic, 218-19; Bold, 220-21. 
Greek: Porson, 180; Antique, 181. 

Hebrew, i8t. 

Inferior letters and figures, monotype, 185. 

Initials: Burford, 249-51; Caxton, 248; 
Delia Robbia, 251-54; Jenson, 256; 
Miscellaneous, 248, 256-59; Roycroft, 
254-55. 

Inscription Greek, 181. 

Interchangeable Gothic, 236. 

Ionic, 212. 

Italic: Bold-Face, 229; Caslon Old Style, 
187; Cheltenham Bold, 210-11; Chel- 
tenham Old Style, 194-95; Elzevir, 
189; Goudy Old Style, 218-19; Jenson 
Old Style, 229; K, No. twenty-five, 165; 
Old Style No. eight, 189; Scotch Roman, 
170-75; also see body types. 

Jenson, Old Style Italic, tag. 

Lightface Gothic, 232. 

Lining Gothic Condensed, 234-35. 

Litho Roman, 238. 



299 



300 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 



Macfarland, 239. 

Miscellaneous Signs: foundry type, 183; 

monotype, 184. 
Monarch, 235. 

Monotype: Modern: six point No. one 
138; six point No. five, 153; seven 
point No. eight, 154; eight point No. 
eight, 155; nine point No. eight, 136; 
eleven point No. eight, 157; Gushing 
figures No. twenty-five, 164; ten point 
Scotch Roman No. thirty-six, 165; 
twelve point Caslon No. three hundred 
thirty-seven, 165; eight point italic 
No. twenty-five K, 165; ten point 
italic No. twenty-five K. 165; twelve 
point italic No. twenty-five K, 165; 
eleven point Person Greek (also on 
ten-point _body), 180; miscellaneous 
signs, on six-, seven-, eight-, nine-, ten-, 
eleven-, and twelve-point body, 184; 
superior letters and figures (Old Style 
and Modern on six-, seven-, eight-, 
nine-, ten-, and eleven-point body), 185; 
inferior letters and figures (Old Style 
on six-, seven-, eight-, nine-, ten-, and 
eleven-point body and Modern on 
ten-point body), 185. Old Style: six 
point No. thirty-one, 146; seven point 
No. thirty-one, 147; eight point No. 
thirty-one, 148; nine point No. thirty- 
one, 149; ten point No. thirty-one, 150; 
eleven point No. thirty-one, 151; 
twelve point No. thirty -one, 152; six 
point Gushing No. twenty-five, 158; 
seven point Gushing No. twenty-five, 
ISO! eight point Gushing No. twenty- 
five, 160; nine point Gushing No. 
twenty-five, 161; ten point No. twenty- 
five, 162; eleven point No. twenty-five, 
163; twelve point No. twenty-five 
(eleven-point face, and accents with 
twelve-point face), 164. 



Nestorian Syriac, 182 

New Model Elite Typewriter, 240., 



Old Style: No. eight, 143-43 (body type), 
188; No. eight Italic, 189; Condensed, 
190-91; Extended, 191-92; French, 
192-^93; Cheltenham, 194; Cheltenham 
Italic, 194-93; monotype, 146-32; 
Goudy Old Style, 217-18; Jenson Italic, 
229. 

Ornaments, 262-77, 282. 

Packard, 222-23. 
Paul Revere, 239. 
Porson Greek, 180. 
Prescription Signs, 278. 
Priory Text, 242 . 

Remington Typewriter, 240. 
Reproducing Typewriter, 240. 

Scotch Roman: body type (foundry), 170- 

73; (monotype), 163; job type, 230-31. 
Script: Tiffany, 246; Tiffany Shaded, 

247; Tiffany Upright, 246-47. 
Special characters: foundry type, 183; 

monotype, 184. 
Superior letters and figures, monotype, 

183. 
Syriac, Nestorian, 182. 

Text: Bradley, 241; Chaucer, 243; 
Priory, 242; Wedding, 244; Engraver's 
Old English, 243; English, 242. 

Tiffany Script, 246. 

Tiffany Shaded, 247. 

Tiffany Upright, 246-47. 

Title Condensed, 239. 

Title Gothic, 212. 

Tudor Black, 241. 

Typewriter: New Model Elite Reming- 
ton, 240; New Model Remington, 240; 
Remington, 240; Reproducing, 240. 

Wedding Text, 244. 
Whittier, 233. 



PRINTED IN THE U.S.A. 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



PAS - QL 

OCT 5 1992 



THE LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
LOS ANGELES 





3 1158 00701 8004 




A 000 467272 



Unii 


